Module 02: Agents — Squeaky's Big Choice

Learning Objectives

Understand what an Agent is (something that makes choices).
Learn that agents have Goals (what they want).
See how agents use Actions to reach their goals.

Introduction: The Big Green Nut

Squeaky the Squirrel found a giant, green nut. It was the biggest nut he had ever seen!

His tummy rumbled. Grrrrr.

"Oh boy!" said Squeaky. "I have a Goal. I want my tummy to stop rumbling."

Squeaky had to make a Choice.

He could Eat the nut right now.
He could Hide the nut for winter.

If he ate it now, his tummy would be full, but he might be hungry later. If he hid it, he would be hungry now, but safe for winter.

Squeaky thought hard. He looked at the sky. It was getting cold. He decided to Hide the nut. He used his paws to dig a hole. Scritch, scratch, pat, pat.

Squeaky is an Agent because he felt something (hunger), thought about it, and made a choice!

Key Concepts

What is an Agent?

An Agent is something that can feel the world and make choices.

 You are an agent.
 Squeaky is an agent.
 A Robot can be an agent.

A rock is not an agent. If you roll a rock down a hill, it can't choose to stop. It just rolls!

Goals (What We Want)

Agents have Goals. A goal is something you want to happen.

 Squeaky's Goal: Stay full and safe.
 Your Goal: Have fun, learn, eat tasty snacks.
 Soccer Player's Goal: Kick the ball into the net.

Actions (What We Do)

To reach a goal, agents take Actions.

 Goal: Get to the other side of the playground.
 Action: Run! Or Skip! Or Walk!

Squeaky's Goal was "Winter Safety," so his Action was "Dig a Hole."

Activities

Activity 1: Agent or Object?

I will say a word. If it's an Agent (makes choices), jump up! If it's just an Object (no choices), crouch down like a rock.

 A Cat! (Jump!)
 A Pillow! (Crouch!)
 A Teacher! (Jump!)
 A Shoe! (Crouch!)

Activity 2: The Goal Game

Imagine you are a hungry bear. What is your goal? (Find honey!) What action do you take? (Sniff for bees!)

Summary

An Agent is something that acts to reach a Goal. Unlike a rock or a shoe, an agent senses the world and chooses what to do next. You are a very special agent because you can choose to do kind and amazing things!

References

 Don't Let the Pigeon Drive the Bus!* by Mo Willems (A story about a pigeon with a goal!)