ActInf GuestStream 111.1 ~ Modeling and Predicting Self-Organization in Dynamic Systems (G Georgiev)

> Source: YouTube
> Playlist: GuestStreams
> Duration: 1:47:28 | Uploaded: Unknown
> Transcript method: auto_caption

Hello, welcome. It is June 11th, 2025. It is active inference guest stream lucky number 111.1. Uh, very nice. And we are with Jorgi Gorgiv who will be presenting and then we'll have a discussion on modeling and predicting self-organization in dynamic systems out of thermodynamic equilibrium part one attractor mechanism and power law scaling. We will look forward to a presentation and some Q&amp;A. So if you're watching live feel free to ask a question. Thank you for joining Geri to you. All right. Thank you Daniel for inviting me. It's my great pleasure to talk to like the active inference institute audience and uh hopefully we have um a lot of um interests in common so we could u have a good discussion or continue to explore those questions. Um I personally know some of the people in your group so I hope uh we'll find a lot of commonalities. Um yes as you said um I'll be talking about some of our recent work on um computer simulations with uh modeling and predicting self-organization in dynamical systems and what we think is driving the self-organization. what is the basic mechanism that's uh leads to increase of order in those systems and how the different characteristics um relate during the process of the self-organization how they grow together and I'll show a lot of examples from other areas to connect to like why is this important why is it interesting and um on this title slide I put the the big picture the arrow of time as presented. This was a poster made by Eric Shaison when he was at um Tufts University at the right center of science education. Uh we were like next uh his office was uh next door to mine. So we had a lot of great conversations and we found that we're interested in the same questions. And actually I had the exact same like conical view of the expanding future and the arrow of time as leading to more interesting things, more organized systems, more intelligent systems and uh needless to say I was very pleasantly surprised when he made this uh poster. So this represents the arrow of time from the big bang pretty much capturing uh everything from the pure energy through formation of structure in uh particles in formation of atoms of galaxies of stars, planets, chemistry, biology, cultural evolution and whatever comes in the future. And the big uh in many people's minds it has been ingrained that the second law of thermodynamics is predicting that everything is uh going to a state of uh thermodynamic equilibrium to entropy and that's why a lot of people are very pessimistic about the heat death of the universe. But meanwhile a lot of interesting things are happening which go in the opposite direction. they're becoming less and less um those systems are becoming le in in less and less of equilibrium. They they're moving further away from equilibrium. And the interesting question is why does this happen? Why they don't just disintegrate? Why they don't fall apart? Why does this why this process of increasing of complexity and structure and everything that we see around us has not stopped let's say a random number of billion years ago if it ever started and why why do we observe everything around us right now how did it come to be well I guess that's a question that a lot of people are thinking from different angles and have different answers and Um I want to point also to another aspect. Not only that the process of self-organization in the universe in all kinds of different systems is moving in an arrow of time of increasing structure, increasing complexity further away from equilibrium. But it happens at an accelerated rate. It has been happening since the big bang and it doesn't seem to be slowing down. If anything, uh I know that some of your audience who told me from machine learning and AI, boy, that's an acceleration. Every day there are new things. So, uh and that's a great example of self-organization when you put tons of information in a neural network and it finds a pattern and you don't know what happened. It it happened by itself, I guess, as far as I know. Maybe the other uh it's it's not my area of of expertise but what I have heard is there is a a kind of structure formation in that information space. Uh so this is another this called a cosmic calendar and it's also well known since probably the 70s. It was made by Carl Sean and I was fascinated by these topics when I was watching it in the 80s in Bulgaria where I was born and uh I couldn't wait for the next episode where he was explaining exactly this interdisiplinary connections between different areas of life of science of culture of history of physics of astronomy and putting it all together and uh his cosmic calendar represents that u let's let's look every so the universe roughly 15 billion years old he mapped it on a year which is 12 months every month is about a billion years a little more and from the big bang which is January the first billion years February March not much is happening now we think with the new observ observations. There could be some more interesting things. But in general, when we look back, we see majority like very small galaxies, small small clusters. In the Milky Way, our own galaxy forms about in May, which is 5 billion years later. Not much interesting things happen, at least from our point of view, until the solar system forms, which is in September of that year. And then quickly photosynthesis emerges in October, in November the ukarotic cells. And now for December, we need this whole panel because things start to accelerate enormously. We have the like fish on the 17th of December, land plants, insects, reptiles, dinosaurs, mammals on the 26th and pangia splits on 27th. So you see that on this cosmic calendar pretty much the human history the first ape divergence is on December 31st on the last day in the humans the homo erectus the anatomically modern humans like 11 neanderals diode 11:59 p.m. And in the very last minute of this enormous span of time uh the last few seconds we have the agriculture like 202 seconds before midnight and third cities and China and uh Christ was born like 4 and a half seconds before midnight and Columbus came to America like 1 second ago. So it seems like there is some driving force that's not only pushing the universe towards creating order and more interesting and more sophisticated systems. But it's doing it in exponentially or super exponential acceleration rate which as you could see here like the the difference in increase of complexity in this last few seconds like I mean since Columbus came here we are now at that AI and super intelligence like that the acceleration is fascinatingly um robust. fast and not only robust but it's getting faster and better. So why is that? Why? First question is why order in uh is created and increases at all and not only that why does it happen faster and faster? Why doesn't it go constant rate? And there is uh just to confirm this um cosmic calendar acceleration. There is uh this is from Ray Kurszswwell. He compiled uh data from Carl Sean and uh all these other sources here, the American Museum of Natural History and Cyclopedia Britannica about major transitions in kind of cosmic complexity, new structures like plants, animals, uh why uh like um civilization and before that more chemistry and and atoms emerging. and how long before the present day they happened. So on the y-axis you you see the time to the next event how many years you have to wait. So pretty much at the beginning you have to wait like 10 billion uh years and when you approach the present this is 10 here on the x-axis time before the present this like 10 years before now pretty much you see that uh those events are happening closer and closer together and all these sources pretty much uh line up on the same kind of trend and you people have objected they say oh how did you choose these events but there are there are like transitions in complexity there are like major milestones and that's what people are looking at and that's why he compiled all these sources to minimize the error so again tremendous acceleration and complexity transitions as we are approaching the present and um going back to Eric son he defined a metric which is called free energy rate density. It's it has some caveats but in general his idea is uh the amount of energy flowing through this um complex self organized systems um per unit mass. So that's why it's in units of energy per second per gram. So it's like the flow the energy rate density through the systems and uh again on the x-axis you have the time before present and uh you could see the enormous acceleration in the you could say that the free energy rate uh through the system is a measure of distance from thermodynamic equilibrium. Right? like a jar of gas if you leave it in the kitchen or or the temperature in your room is pretty much at equilibrium. Every point has the same temperature. But in those systems, you have great differences inside them in all kinds of measures, not just temperature. And that distance from equilibrium is correlated with the structure of those systems like stars, planets, animals, brains, society, etc. And um Ray Kurszswwell looked at uh calculations per second. That's why he was able to do all these accurate predictions of um computing in computing technology and AI where he actually mapped that on a super exponential like the his his points for uh comput calculations per second per thousand versus time and this only until 2000 but I've seen his most recent plots until 2025 they are all on this white uh kind of dashed line and um that's also accelerating. So wherever we look we see gigantic rise in complexity and structure and information and we see super exponential or at least like Moore's law is strictly exponential but it's only a fraction of this um paradigm here for the CPUs. Obviously, Ray cursor looked further back. But even if you took a small portion of this data set, uh even exponential acceleration is is very very big deal on longtime scales as we know. All right. So now the question about this huge variety of structures and this huge kind of diversity between systems is very very complex by itself and uh to answer it we need to go to something simple and uh try to understand that first and then try to build on it and here I'm showing an example of a system that people have studied a lot which is self-organization sp sp sp sp sp sp sp sp sp sp sp sp sp spontaneous organization happening by itself just when you pass energy through a system and in this case on the left you have so imagine you're sitting at your kitchen and you have a pan with water and you turn on the the heat and now you have a hot bottom plate and cold top surface in the room, right? And honestly by eye you don't see much but if you people put like different particles inside to see the motion of the fluid or we use a infrared camera we could see the the structure formation and what happens is a small difference in temperature between the bottom and the top. Obviously now the according to the second law of thermodynamics the heat that has to be transferred from the hot to the cold from the bottom to the top but at very small differences it's enough to just that the thermal diffusion the collisions between the molecules are enough and the fluid stays kind of still the heat is transferred slowly but if you increase the temperature on the bottom plate then something interesting happens that mechanism of energy transfer is not enough and the fluid self organizes in what's called convection rolls. So if you look from the top uh there will be these long um lines which are basically the this is looking from the side to show that the convection pattern of this uh of the water or oil whatever fluid you have. And um not only that, but if you increase this temperature difference even more, then you could go through a whole set of very intricate patterns. Uh this is uh kind of a computational study, but in the lab we could observe this a very simple image here of like this will break into u sometimes a honeycomb structure. They look like a beehive kind of uh like where the bees put the the honey uh six kind of angled shapes and then if you increase the temperature even further you get different shapes. So basically this is what people mean when they say self organization I think it's more appropriate appropriately to say energy induced organization because the flow of energy it seems is the driving force that creates structure in those systems and again this is the very very simplest system that's that I could think of uh which just has the fluid and the temperature difference and yet it could create this variety of structures imagine now all other kinds of a lot more complicated systems and uh life systems that are life and that you pass energy through them and then you have metabolic cycles and all other kinds of patterns. It's just mindboggling. But it's at this level of science, it's almost impossible now. It's so complicated. It's almost impossible to understand everything. But can we still say something meaningful? Okay. So we looked also at um well known to biologist scaling laws which are that uh if you increase the size of animals let's say you go if you go from a mouse to an elephant the metabolic rate uh changes. In other words, they use less energy per unit mass and they become more efficient in their metabolism. And um we looked at CPUs. So and also the energy passing through the CPUs here that x-axis is total number of quant which means um quant means uh we are using units of uh physical action but if you normalize it per unit time it's just the energy that the CPU uses and the number of transistors inside. So as you increase uh the number of transistors in the CPUs, well you could say obviously they'll use more energy, but we shouldn't forget that they getting smaller and smaller and smaller. So it's not that obvious how much more energy they should use and what will be the pattern. So now these two scales are logarithmic, the X and the Y and a straight line. you could pass a straight line through the data points is a power law relationship, right? So one is the other time uh to the power of some number. And just to compare we looked um at uh brains and the energy consumption of brains again in like terms of total number of quant that will be the power used by brains of animals at different size and the neuronal count in the brains. And I was amazed to see that like uh they form they much much more lined up but uh they form the same power law relationship and if I mean the brain is not a computer but still there are units in the brain and there is energy passing through the brain and they are scaling in uh proportional relationship. So there is something that says some that gives us some hint about uh underlying dynamics. All right. So our approach so I'm coming from physics is to go to basic principles of physics and um ask the question why and how those systems self-organize and can we measure or how can we measure this degree of organization. And if we put two systems next to each other, both are complex, both are performing some amazing things. But do we have a basis to say which one is more organized, better organized, which will be if you have a biological system like which one will out compete the other which is more fit and there is a basic principles principle in physics called the principle of least action. uh in other words uh it was said by mapu in the 1600s that nature is most economical in all of its actions and before him even the ancient Greeks and many other the dowist philosophy is also based on this efficiency principle so it seems like um I mean in science it's not usually accepted to talk in terms of final goal of kind of teology of a system. But if a system tries to become most economical in everything that happens in it, it will restructure itself, reorganize to get to even more economical state or more efficient state. And in our society, we have economies of scale, right? So if you have a bigger plant or a bigger company, the more units you produce of the same thing, the cheaper they get. So you have this size and um efficiency relationship. what does this principle? So now based on this principle, I'll show you the mathematical definition of it. But um just to tell you beforehand that for those of you who are not physicists, those of you who are physicists, you all know that all branches of physics everywhere in relativity, in quantum mechanics, in classical mechanics, in electromagnetism, in fluid dynamics, in optics, everything is derived on this principle. String theory that every textbook starts with this principle and derives equations. So mathematically it looks like this. So if you uh take two points the starting point and the ending point uh for travel of some in physics it will be a atom or like molecule some particle and uh in more complex systems. I would like to think it should be applicable to any motion even in biology and in social systems because if this principle is valid and governs all the motion in physics why not why should stop working all of a sudden in in those systems which are composed by the same atoms and molecules. And uh it says the following that out of the all possible trajectories or paths that an object could take from the starting to the ending point. You could see some of them here represented with like wiggly lines. It always takes the shortest path. And this symbol delta here means if we vary this path we increase the what this is called the action. I'll define it in a second. But basically, it becomes less efficient. The motion becomes less efficient in terms of action. And that's what means that nature is most economical of in all of its actions. Basically, it's most action efficient. It does everything all of the motions are happening with the least amount of this quantity action. And uh here is how it looks. So I here stands for action and delta is this variation. If you vary it make it a little bit smaller or greater and this integral here here means that we just take the whole path from the beginning to end from t1 to t2 when we start the motion when we end. And this l here is in physics it's simply the difference between kinetic and potential energy. So to give you another very obvious example, if you take your pencil now and you drop it in the room, well from experience, you can predict which way it's going to go, it's going to fall in a straight line. And if you calculate the action for it to move on a straight line and to move on a curved path to the left, to the right, to wiggle, uh all of those other paths will have higher action. So if you vary the action, you always get higher values. But if you drop it a million times, it a million times it will fall with the lowest action on a straight line. And the same is true for much more complicated systems. Um again even for fields not just for objects. That's how we do physics. All right. Um now when we consider a complex system obviously it doesn't involve a single object and by definition it's a collection of it's a system right it's by definition it has a multitude of objects or you could call them agents that interact with each other that travel along paths that have to if you represent the complex system as a network. In biology, you could have a metabolic network. In computer science, you could have a neural network. Um, now how does this minimization could help us there if we want to apply it, right? in in expanding the definition that we saw previous on the previous slide for a single object here I is the same amount the same quantity action in the integral of the lrange and it is the kinetic minus potential energy but now we say this is each of the objects in the system uh let's say I is the number of the object let's say you have 10 agents 10 atoms or whatever it is, they are moving and they do J crossings between the nodes of the system and we sum all of these the action for all of these crossings or all of these events that they perform to get from A to B and we we say all right if each of them obeys physics laws there is no argument to say that they don't then the minim minimization of the sum of all these actions should be zero. So what does it mean the sum? Why don't we say each of them individually? Well, if we have a system that has many crossing paths, uh obstacles inside, right? Neither of them could move on their own least action path. Neither of them could move on a straight line. They have to find curve paths to get from one uh node to the other, from one starting point to an ending point. But all everything that's happening there, we're saying to obey the laws of physics, it should be minimizing the sum of these all of these actions. And not only that as we'll see later uh it will be to minimize it it will be like a temporary state but in this cosmic evolution as you go through different levels of uh structure formation it should continue to decrease. So this is called a stationary action principle where the every variation is greater and you find uh some stationary value. But we want to think in terms of evolutionary systems of dynamical action principles and I'll show you in a second how it looks. So this is our starting point that we take all of the actions for all of the agents in the system and minimize that that sum and we could express this as a ratio. um it could be derived from stochastic dissipative action principles but for now I'm not going to show that um so the ratio is the following so here we have the same thing n objects they do m events m crossing between the nodes here is the sum of all of the actions for all of those crossings and here we'll multiply some constant h which is called the planks constant it's the smallest unit of action in physics And we say that this ratio we call it action efficiency. In other words, how efficiently the agents in the system are moving to perform their functions. And we say that the more action efficient the system is or the the larger the smaller the the denominator, the less energy and time they need to use to perform their functions. That's a signature of better structures structure in the system shorter paths. If it's biology, it could be enzymes that are speeding up reactions. If it's neural networks, I think I've seen people apply similar principle optimization principles even in in neural networks and economics there is optimal control principles. uh so they use not the same but similar approaches. So basically we say that the organization in our language the organization of the system will be reflected in this efficiency. In other words, if a system is more poorly organized, if the agents have to travel longer distances to get from here to there, they'll perform slower their functions. They will consume more energy. And if you put two systems next to each other, if they're biological, one will out compete the other. Even if they're in economics, one will be more efficient, people will buy the more efficient one. So for us, the measure of u how well organized a system is is this action efficiency. And here we just like compress the notation. And we say this total amount of action, the sum of everything that happens in the system over the planks constant. We call it we label it with the symbol Q which means this sum of all of the actions. And uh the flow of events or the number of events all agents times all the crossings that they do is phi which is flow of events. And uh this same equation here becomes uh the number of things that happen the number of events functions in the system divided by the total amount of action expended for it. Right? So, but if this was the only thing that happened, then I would expect if the the least action principle was the only factor that determined how systems should self-organize and how they should form a structure because it acts everywhere in all particles. there will be life on Mars and there'll be life on Venus and uh everything will be getting more more complex but in our understanding that's not the case because the level of structure in the systems as I that's why I showed this previous slides that as the size of the system is increasing the number of components is increasing in proportional manner depends also on we talked a little bit before that about cybernetics on this positive feedback loops between all of the characteristics in the system. I'll give you a short example before I go on. But let's say if we do a simulation of ants forming a path between the foot and the nest, right? It could be any, you could call it other things. But if we put very few ants, they don't form a path. Even if you go in the forest, you look at the ants. If you have very if you have one ant and it goes to the foot, it will never form a trail, right? So you need some critical number of agents. So that already tells you that yes you will minimize the action but in order it's conditional in order to minimize it you need some number of agents you need some amount of energy flow through the system you need all these other prerequisites for that to happen. Okay. So um SD lap so lap stands for least action principle and SD stands for stoastic and dissipative um least action principle because it has been extended for I would say already close to a 100 years by and many others to uh include in this um equation for action not just kinetic and potential but also dissipation, also random effects. But even with all those effects, systems um or objects still tend to minimize this quantity of action. all right so our basic model you could include any number of characteristics I just put several here is that we understand so our so the action efficiency will be the measure of how structured is the system how organized how efficient how closely it obeys the physics laws but it does so in conjunction with all these other characteristics in the system and I'll name them but before I say that I purposely labeled alpha the action efficiency as the quality of the system right how efficient how well it's performing its functions and Q like the total amount of action in the system as the quantity or proportional to the size of the system and in um philosophy in dialectical like uh In Hegel's dialectics, the quantity quality transition was one of the main three main mechanisms of pretty much progressive evolution and I think that's absolutely um true and and working in this uh example. Uh so here we have the efficiency of the system, the quality, the quantity, the total amount of action. N is the number of agents in the system. Uh we saw before the number of transistors, the number of neurons. Five is the flow of events. Let's say if it's a brain, how many I don't know information, computational events, or if it's a computer, how many calculations per second it will do. And we say that each of those reinforces each other. So in other words, if I increase the size of the system, I'm creating more opportunities for it to restructure itself to reorganize to perform its u functions more efficiently. That will increase the quality. But as it increases the quality, it creates shorter paths. It consumes less energy. then it will allow for the system to grow so it could attract more agents and it it could perform more events the flow of events. Um I was always uh giving to my students when they start a very simple example and I'll give it here because I know the audience is broad but uh I'm based in uh the Boston area and we had a big project here which was called the big dick. Basically, the Boston Highway was the most congested in the country until the '9s, and for about 10 years, they had to destroy the highway 93 and put another highway underground and new branches. But the efficiency of the transportation right getting from one point to the other in the city was getting so low that the population growth of Boston stopped. Nobody was building anything new and even it started decreasing. people were exiting the city and as soon as so basically you have that if you fix one of these quantities you arrest the other right and as soon as people build the infrastructure they put the new highway then it became uh action efficient like fast and with less expenditure of energy to get from point A to B and people started moving into the city and building and the population continued to row until it exceeds the limits disproportionality values between quality and quantity basically and it will stop again and then it will um people will find the need to build a new infrastructure to increase the efficiency. So I see those as inducing each other helping each other in this in this example. All right. So in general, let's say if you open a textbook on general systems theory, let's say Bertali, if you have several quantities that in a positive feedback loop, they reinforce each other, you could model them with um just simple differential linear differential equations where the dot here means the time derivative, the rate of growth of alpha, the action efficiency, the rate of growth of Q, the total action, the rate of growth number of events, the rate of growth, the number of agents in the system. Uh, and they depend on all of the others, right? I could increase alpha or q or phi or n and that will reflect the the growth of of this quantity. And this linear system of differential equations, it's a very simple system. I mean it could be made a lot more complicated with nonlinear effects with others but it's complicated as it is. So let's start simple the solutions are exponential growth. So just if you suppose this positive feedback loop between all of them and you plug them into this equations and you solve the equations each of them alpha qi n in time it grows strictly exponentially. So I'm like aha is there something to do with the acceleration of order in the universe? So there are positive feedback loops acting in all of these different types of systems that make them selforganize faster and faster like in the cosmic calendar of of Carl Sean and in the graphs of um Ray Kurszswwell and Eric Sha and um uh here I put some mathematical details but uh if you ask me I'll go through them but at the moment I'll skip. So basically these are the exponential solutions right each of them is its initial value time exponent some number times the time so they grow exponential all right but when you take any uh any of those exponential equations and you combine them if you ask me I could go through that and I have them in my papers but if you combine them algebraically you get power law relationships between those quantities always between alpha and ni and n and q and I didn't show the others alpha and q all of them right so they grow proportional to each other with some power and now going back to the graph with the number of transistors in CPUs as the uh power consumption grows that's a power load the number of neurons in the brain brain as the power consumption of the brain goes power wall I'm like is there any connection here is this signature of this underlying dynamics of this reinforcement between the different characteristics of the system this interdependent kind of mathematical functions and here just to show something that everybody knows we plotted the transistor count versus time for CPUs which is on a low linear scale a straight line that's the same like this graph here low linear straight line that's an exponential growth. So is there something in the growth of computing that is uh obeying these dynamics right and um all right so we think that at least on the first approximation again this model could be made with fluctuations with noise with other terms but it seems to be following this predict pred predictable mathematical pattern where you could say if those characteristics reinforce each other they predicted to grow exponentially then I look at different systems and I plot them on low linear curve they are straight lines they grow exponentially it predicts power law scaling I look at brains I look at CPUs I look at animals they have power law scaling Jeffrey West had a book in 2007 17 called scale where it has probably thousands of those scaling relationships between different characteristics. So is this a signature of some underlying dynamic that drives the systems forward not just describes but pushes them to become more organized and more sophisticated and more evolved. Right? Cosmic evolution is the term uh that people uh use like Eric Shaison and Carl Sean and others and um I know the big history community also has contacted me because they also interested in the same questions like this big history from the big bank until now why are these events happening so could this principle help with that explanation and AIE stands for this Average action efficiency. Basically, we say that we can use it to measure the how close the agents of the system obeying these physics laws and also to predict or to determine which will be if the system continues to evolve what will be the the most efficient state or the most organized state of that system. that it will eventually reach. So we think that this shows some promise of predictive power of emergent structures. Right? In our I will show our simulation, we could predict that if we if the agents obey the least action principle that they will start with random state and form a path that is a straight line if there are no obstacles and they do. um and also um explanatory power as to obey this Um that's why that's why they are self-organizing. All right. So some examples very few examples of size complexity rules. It was uh named in 2002 paper I think by Bonire. Well, it has also from 93 some data but um has a lot of data and he compiled from different papers. So these are uh mean techno units per tool in um populations in Oceanania. uh predicting technological complexity and the population size. I mean he would look at Oceanania because he wants to look at kind of isolated islands, isolated societies otherwise you have to consider them as a part of the bigger system. And uh this is a logarithmic scale. This is uh this is also logarithmic scale. He fits the data with a straight line which is one of those power law equations that we show. Then a different system number of cell types in biological systems and the total number of cells in those organisms very noisy very dispersed but people have fitted with a power law relationship right so you have the number of cell types is some measure of complexity right you could create different organs different structures and the total number of cells is the size of the system right the hegel's uh quantity quality transition As you increase the quantity of the system, its quality, its structure also is increasing. Um, about ants, here is number of ants in ant colony on the x-axis lo scale in the lo number of casts in the ant colony increasing with a power law relationship. Here is from uh torching the evolution of complex hierarchical society, different countries, population of countries as it grows through time and hierarchical level in those countries like different institutions local lock scale power law relationships. Um here the lock of number of occupations in different states of India and the population of the states of India. The bigger the state, the more different the larger number of different occupations there are. Some measure of complexity. And I just even put because this is interesting to put together the joint growth of population in the world and GDP per capita. And as the size of the world increases in terms of population in blue, the GDP growth is increasing par in parallel which suggests this coupling this power uh relationship. One is some number times the other and also it shows this exponential or or rather super exponential growth. uh our model this simple model predicts exponential which is kind of a similar curve but wherever we look it's it's it's amazing it's everywhere. So we looked also at some more kind of simple physical systems. We uh we looked at uh here the all right. So we look at the different stars with one of my previous students and he uh measured the progress of nucleioynthesis in those stars in terms of the size of the stars in terms of the mass like measure as a measure of the size of the stars. So the bigger a star gets, the larger fraction of its initial hydrogen it converts to heavier nuclei. And not only it does, it's on a lock log scale. All of those are straight lines, but it does so in this proportionality relationship in power wall scaling. And the different lines here are just different starting initial fractions of heavier elements. It's called metallicity in astronomy. And um not only that but the rate of nucleioynthesis the in other words the acceleration how fast they are producing those heavier elements as you increase the number uh the mass the number of solar masses or the size of the star. Not only they produce larger fraction of their mass uh turn it into heavy elements but they do it way faster than the slow ones produce the small one. So we see the power law scaling of the progress of nuclear synthesis as a measure of the complexity of the star in terms of its mass and the acceleration right the the bigger they are the faster they do it. So it's very exciting that no matter where we'll look uh we see those probably one could look for exceptions and try to falsify it but um again there in Jeffrey West and other books there are a lot a lot of examples of scaling laws. All right so let me show you one of uh what one of my students did last summer. So he did in agent uh agent based simulations in net logo um with ant colony where you have like um the foot and the nest and here I'm showing like the 3D version of the simulation you could put different obstacles you could put friction you could make it as you could create a maze you could make it as complicated as you want and ask them to find the shortest path but in the simplest case this is just a 2D view of the simulation ation or the version of the simulation. And here is the world X and Y. And they would start in green. The green ants at the initial state there. We start them totally random like the gas molecules in the room. There is no structure, right? And then they randomly pass through the foot and the nest. They pick up a pheromone. As they move, they drop a little bit of it and it evaporates. It diffuses. But if another ant senses that it crosses the path, it starts moving along the gradient of that pheromone. And in the red here is some intermediate state where they probe several different paths. So it already looks like with the least action principle where you have several longer paths and now they answer exploring them trying to figure out which one they like and finally they settle on the one that's closest to the shortest neither of the long paths. They don't like the the long action paths. Uh, of course you have some wiggles here because you have some memory effects which aren't passed where but u in general if you leave them long enough they will uh like create shorter and shorter path they will make this line straighter. So basically they'll minimize their action to cross. If you think of a big network with millions of nodes, this will be just two nodes of the network and the agents in that system when they're crossing these two nodes out of all possible paths, they'll choose always the shortest one. In network theory, you have like geodasic distance like the shortest distance as a measure. And here's just how the simulation would run, right? They'll start randomly and now they will restart again where they disperse randomly and then uh they will explore different paths find the pherommones here is the intermediate stage and finally they'll settle on the closest path to the straight line to the shortest. So basically here I'm describing like what happens at each of those steps but I already went over this but yeah random to forming the final trail and the least action efficiency in the first state when they are moving everywhere and not achieving anything and the highest action efficiency at the end where they're crossing for the shortest time and with the least energy expenditure. And this is for those of you that are curious how the simulation window looks like. You could change, you could put as many parameters as you want. You could change them. You could ask all kinds of questions from this simulation even though it's very simple. And now what is the action in this case? I told you L I is the action integral of the lrangian. And here in our simulation we define all right. So the motion the velocity of the ants will determine their kinetic energy, right? The mass of the ant times the velocity squared over two. That's simple. And then the potential energy is a little bit more tricky. So here we model the potential as effective potential coming from the concentration of the pheromone that they deposit. So that's equivalent of uh information in in any other system. Right? So the more information there is the larger this potential and the faster they will form the root. And here like this exponent is just describing the evaporation rate or if it's a brain it will be the forgetting right the memory loss or if it's some other system where the information will deteriorate then there is a diffusion term and this is um a random term they they move with a wiggle angle of they don't move always on a straight line because they want to explore the neighboring paths to see if there is a shorter one. So in our run they had plus - 25° at each step. They don't just move along the the information the steepest information gradient the steepest uh concentration gradient but they wiggle a little bit to see well if there is a king here can I find a shortcut can I make it even shorter right so this helps them find the lowest action path but obviously if there is this random noise this makes this analytically not solvable so the simulation does solve it numerically pretty much right and here is the output from this simulation. So we have the average action efficiency at the end when they form the final trail not at the intermediate stages. We have other curves for that but this this will be just the final state and here we change the number of hands similar to the number of cells in organisms or number of people in society. And as you increase the size of the system, again, quantity quality transition, the more ants you put in the simulation, the larger you make that system in that society, the the shorter path they find, the more efficient path they find. So, in other words, in our language, it's better organized, right? It obeys more closely the the physics principles. And uh again like uh we saw a bunch of other examples. We also found uh something um very interesting. So not only uh we call that unit total dualism, right? So not oops um let me go back forward. All right. So if we if we look at the entropy the randomness of those um ants in the simulation obviously at the beginning they're the most random at the end they have the least randomness the least entropy but let's say the entropy per the unit entropy and the final entropy for the same quantity entropy we also find power law relationships on a lo scale this they scale they fall on a straight line and uh and we looked also the information unit information total information. So we think there is something even more important again as the size of the system the total quantity of the system is increasing. The total u microscopic measures the microscopic measures change proportionally as well. And here is the average action efficiency which will be like the microscopic measure how each ant how efficiently each ant is moving and the the total amount of action again a power low similar to the CPU or the stellar evolution or any other of the data but again what I mentioned earlier was that um we don't want the variation of the this average action to be uh stationary to reach some final minimum. But we want cosmic evolution. We want those systems to keep getting better and better and to transition to more complex systems. So a dynamical principle will be that this will not be an equality anymore. the the variation will not settle around some minimum value but it will keep finding ways to to shorten this uh to to to decrease the action and here uh for broader audience I'm uh kind of reminded now I'm just tempted to say that uh you probably know of Buckminister Fuller right he built this geodeic dome in Canada in Montreal for the Olympic games and Fuller is the the bucky balls and named after him. But he also came up with ephemeralization which the definition is we'll do more with less more with less until we could do everything with nothing. So I think this is exactly this equation. We'll do more events with less action more events with less action until we we could pretty much do everything with almost almost no expenditure. I don't know whether that will happen and when it will happen but I think it's a a tractor state at least even if we don't reach it I think that's kind of the the teological goal of those systems to get to this maximum efficiency until they could do everything with nothing and also here when I say about unit and f unit and total quantities this dualism I want to give this example with Javon's paradox for those of you that are not uh physicists But let's say this is an economics paradox. Probably all of you have heard it. It came from I think long time ago maybe the 60s the 70s when there was the oil shock right and people tried to make more efficient cars because the fuel was very expensive and they said well we'll save fuel if we increase the efficiency of cars per mile by a factor of two miles per gallon. uh expenditure of fuel or the the run of the cars, then we'll use half of the oil in the world and everything will be great. And when they build those more efficient cars, what they found is that the total amount of fuel expenditure actually increased. And they were like, what did they what just happened? We doubled the efficiency of the cars. we expected to half the the spending for fuel and the fuel expenditure increased even more and uh that's why he called it paradox because they couldn't explain it. Obviously the logical explanation is as people pay less for per mile they'll drive more miles and they'll do more things right but in our language is as you increase the efficiency of the system the system could grow so you'll increase the total action so this is I think a feature not a bug it's a necessary it's that's how complex systems work that's how that's how they selforganize it's not a paradox uh in our understanding we think it's it's necessary prerequisite for because they are in this positive feedback loop so each of them increases the other the efficiency increases the total expenditure the total expenditure increases the efficiency and here I not going to spend much time on this these are just sample um like runs of the phase transition from disorder to order of different quantities It is like entropy, action efficiency information in terms of thermal and density and average part time. And they show this typical transition phase transition behavior observed everywhere in physics and in other systems. Um this graph I showed you earlier just to compare to remind you again of real world systems displaying this unit total dualism or size complexity rule. Uh so the stars become more complex as they get bigger. But also this is from one of the Jeffrey West paper from uh um like many like more than 15 years ago. I think 2006 probably is the paper itself where he looked at the log of the gross metropolitan product of cities as a log of the population of cities and it's on a log scale. It's a power law. It's hard to see here but um if you look at the paper in the caption it's like going at 1.15 the power in that power law uh relationship. So as cities are get bigger they are producing more per person. So the unit productivity is increasing as the total population of the cities is increasing. So basically there is no paradox. All right. So I tried to bunch up bunch here everything together to kind of summarize what I talked. I hope it's not overwhelming but a lot of these things we already talked so it's kind of a review. So here I'm repeating this least action principle. It's also called Hamilton's principle because he defined it in its modern version where any particle or field in physics will choose the least action path the red line which is the straight line if there are no other obstacles versus all these other possibilities for longer paths. And when we look at the ant simulation they explore this longer paths. They start with total randomness but finally they choose the one that is shortest with some because they have this wiggle angle this random parameter. It's a wider path. It's not a straight line but still it's like the shortest possible path that they would take the most action efficient. And here I'm repeating this feedback loop between the action efficiency and the size or the quantity and the quality of the system which pred which predicts this transition from randomness to order and I didn't even show here like the exponential transition and the power law scaling the quantity quality transition or the size complexity rule. Quantity quality is the language of Hegel. size complexity the language of Bonire scaling of many people including Jeffrey West but they all point to the same thing because you increase the size of the system it's complexity or quality is increasing and also this unit total dualism that the unit quantity is proportional by a power law to the total of the same quantity in the system and we want to think of This principle to minimize action and participating in the positive feedback loop as the cause of the self-organization and this power law scalings and the structure as the effect and we could make a prediction beforehand solve these equations and we looked at the outcome in the data and we see correspondence. So this is kind of a summary of all these things and if I have a minute I could this kind of the same thing expanded a little bit more but again the Hamilton's principle the shortest path is the physically realized path in nature the mechanism is this feedback loops between here a lot more quantities that we measured in our simulation and this is the entropy change the phase transition corresponding to the different stages of an distribution finding the structure which is the shortest path at the end and here I I I don't want to repeat many of the graphs this kind of I already mentioned some of them earlier but here is one uh by carro he's anthrop he was anthropologist and in ' 67 he published a paper where he went to look at indigenous tribes in the Amazon rainforest. And he uh he went there because he wanted them again like those islands to be separated to form like a separate society. And he looked at the number of organizational traits that they have a chieftain, a priest, a tradesman, how many structures they have in the society and on the x-axis is the population. And he observed that all these villages, autonomous villages as he called them, lay on this power law line. And he even wrote that if one of them increased in population and deviated let's say went in this blank area here this low is so strong that they either have to form structures to get back to the same power low line or if they don't they will split in two and move back to the line here. So they either will go up in complexity or they'll go down in size but they cannot stay away from this power law proportionality. So um here are some other relationship between action efficiency and entropy difference uh also power total action and entropy. We have huge amounts of graphs in the paper from last year with the same title as the talk. And um here is with different populations. The entropy starts with high entropy randomness and scales down. And obviously even the final state has more entropy for more ants. But we looked at the entropy change basically the randomness at the beginning and at the end. And with larger population they decrease larger decrease in entropy which is uh the reverse is increases in order as measured by entropy or you could say measure entropy is a measure of um loss of information right of uncertainty. So you could convert it to information. And to go back to the I told you I was always thinking in terms of this cone where oh some things are not showing well where starting from the beginning of self organization until today the systems are growing in size and they're growing up in in complexity and in quality. And that's what is forming this cone. this reciprocality between the size of the systems and and their complexity going uh up in this is an arrow of time of increase of complexity and um yeah in our model they grow exponentially. So to finish I would say to repeat that we understand at least action principle as predicting the increase of action efficiency because the agents in any system should obey as closely as they can the physics law the physics principles move in the same way as in any other system and that will correspond to increase of structure forming a more efficient or uh organization in terms of action efficiency, but it's the average action efficiency for all of them. And then uh the system of this interconnected characteristics with positive feedback loops predicts the exponential growth and power low scalings which we saw in several systems, several examples. And this complexity size rule which is a scaling relationship or power holds at different levels of organization physical like stellar, biological, societal in many systems. And this unit uh total dualism of these characteristics also speaks about this connection between kind of microscopic for a single agent and microscopic for the whole system. That system needs to get bigger for its agents to get more efficient and the agents need to get more efficient for the system to grow bigger. and also dynamic collection principles because we have open-ended evolution and it has to go in the words of um uh Buckminister Fuller all the way to to familialization or to in the physics language maybe to zero action or close asytoically to very very small action per one event and that we could predict that the most action efficiency based on uh lap will be the structure that are form and uh yeah so we think that action average action efficiency provides this number this measure. We could take two systems and we say this system has organization which corresponds to this number of action average action efficiency and this has a lower or higher number. So it's less organized or more organized. So we could quantify it and we think that this potential may have implications across disciplines as people say if you cannot measure something you cannot improve it. So we need a a number a measure for how organized a system instead of just saying this looks more complex than the others. And um with in future work we think that this model could be extended to different types of complex systems. Let's say with modeling, with friction, with dissipation, we could look at other quantities and also we could test it for more specific like either biological or social systems. Let's say can you model a photosynthetic or crap cycle in biology or metabolic cycles? And also in technology, if nature uses those optimization principles, how can we use them to build more efficient cities, more efficient internet structures, communication technologies, robotics, and so forth. So I'll stop here. Thank you for your attention. And if you have any questions, I'll be happy to talk more about this. Sorry if I took too much time. Okay, I did. Thank you. Okay, great. Anyone watching live can add a question in live chat. Um, I guess just while I'm reccropping everything, how did you come to this question and what does research in your lab look like for yourself and for students? Oh, how did I come to this question? It's very interesting. I could just tell you if you really want to know. I was in high school and I'm walking in my hometown. Okay, it's a city but small city 200,000 people and I'm looking I'm kind of imagining it historically having this small population this first houses and then bigger buildings and bigger buildings and I'm like all right if you go to New York City you'll see this 100 story skyscrapers so you have this increase of density and decre that means decrease of distance between the points in the system, right? To so not only you get more efficient paths but the end points are getting closer and closer. So that even we didn't even talk about that you increase the efficiency by shortening the paths by getting the points closer like in CPUs you make the uh kind of transistor smaller and you decrease the distance between them for the computation that increases even more the action efficiency. And I'm like, what is going on? Where how does it go? I was imagining maybe in the future the whole city will fit in one building, which which will be the ultimate efficiency. Everything will be as close as possible. It will take the least time to get from here to there, which now if you look at uh uh the Dubai buildings or some others, they host pretty much whole city. So I think may may have already happened. Um and that could explain why people why in the world people will build such buildings. I I would in my language that will be to decrease to increase the interaction or to decrease the time and and energy that it takes for people to communicate or to get in touch with each other. Obviously now we have internet we can talk to anybody but we still use physical kind of presence. And then I started like uh I was reading then at that time like uh the electrical kind of philosophy and Hegel and I'm like oh if the city is getting bigger there is a quantity quality transition it's getting more efficient people are closer together they exchange more information they create more inventions they they build better structures right and then I but there wasn't that I'm talking about the 80s. Obviously, there was the Santa Fe Institute, but it was here and I was in Bulgaria and that was behind the iron curtain. So, I couldn't do anything in complexity or in this kind of line of research. So I went to study physics because I thought okay if I uh if I want to explain why these systems are self-organizing how they are self-organizing probably I need to know all these basic principles then I came to the US to study I did my PhD at Tus University in physics I did a postock at northeastern in physics and then I went teaching and uh and even for my PhD and posdock I couldn't do anything in complex system. So I had to do any other kind of physics that will give me a PhD and and a pos and a faculty position. And now after I got those and I got tenure and promotion, I could kind of uh work full-time or think full-time about those issues which gives me a great pleasure now. So yeah, my question always has been about why why is this? What's going on? What's this magic that's happening that gives us this world instead of a universe filled with hydrogen atoms randomly dispersed everywhere or empty space? Why in the world they built us? How? Yeah. So that's my motivation pretty much. Um yeah, very interesting. I really appreciated the Buckminister Fuller connection and it's very intriguing that the path of least action follows a geodessic in arbitrary state spaces on kind of like a curved trajectory. For example, the ant example, it wasn't a straight straight line. it still had a little wiggle that would be in tension between the attractive uh character of the pheromone and how much variability and movement like all those different features and so but yet across many replicates of the simulation you would get a straight line yet every single line in practice is going to it's or it's like it's like jumping rope. It's like the average is flat, but that's something that arises not necessarily even at every collective behavioral level. more like a across scenario mean field or or central limit theorem type results that gives an orderly straight line through all the curves and set up for that to be manifested in geodessic architecture with tense segreg to to it's very provocative Fuller talked about people traveling more and he said well people were into horse and cart and then now there's the car the car and then the plane and then what's interesting is it goes up and up and up but then it can't always and now average travel for example might be I don't know maybe it's dropping so how do we reconcile these smoothly fitting curves with balancing knowing that like not everything can curve in that regime forever for so what is it that switches regimes of coherent scaling? Well, thank you for that question. Yes, I want to go back to my example that I gave with the Boston Highway, the the big dick as we call it here because it was a big mess while they were doing it. But uh I think that's why I kept repeating that this is a first approximation of this model. So this smooth exponential and power law curves uh if we look more carefully at data um actually I think they they have a sinosoidal kind of looking like oscillation around the exponential and I'll say what I mean that when I said let's say what caused people to build the new highway, the big dick or the new infrastructure that will increase the action efficient. Well, that puts a population pressure. You got more people, you got more congestion. But that has a time delay. They can't build it in real time, right? You get five more people, you build another five miles of highway or something, right? So, you have to wait to uh some threshold. And I think um yeah the infrastructure reaches some level and then it waits until the pressure is large enough to push it to the next level. So it it has to almost in in this case with the congestion it's almost like a a crisis like you have this impossible way to live and you have to do something but I think there is this lack between all those uh characteristics they don't just smoothly as you said correctly and you observed correctly they don't smoothly incrementally increase each other and grow proportional all the time but I think they go in this uh multiple logistics transitions right so they have a transition to a new level and stop and then wait until the rest of the system grows to that level the rest of the characteristics and then there is another transition and it stops and this way they build this and even Ray Kerszswwell in his book the singularity is near has exactly that figure or similar figure at the beginning where he has this sequential transitions between different computational platforms right let's say at the beginning people will do calculations I don't know with abacus for hundreds of years and then they'll do with uh I don't know mechanical calculators then with relay tubes but between them there is kind of a a very fast jump and then they stay they plateau for a So I think this is the real picture and we're working how to put that in the equation how exactly to reflected in the model but that's you're very correct. Yeah. So I guess sort of in closing as we look at on one hand the decades of systems theory and multiscale complex systems analysis agent based modeling etc that brought us here and we look forward like over the coming few years what are you going to be looking for? What do you feel like your own research may yield? Are there events that you anticipate that you feel would provide important validation? Are there tool developments or what will those advances in tooling or development provide? Yes, thank you for that question. It's very very probably the most important question. Very spot on. So I'm asking myself that every day. Why the problem of self-organization and order increasing in the universe hasn't been solved so far 100 years ago. And I think the main obstacle is that uh non-equilibrium thermodynamics hasn't been uh fully developed and we need it in order to understand what's happening in systems away from thermodynamic equilibrium. We know what happens in thermodynamic equilibrium. Nothing. Everything is the same. But the interesting things happen away from thermodynamic equilibrium. We don't have a good theory for that. there are many attempts uh but what is giving me a great hope is the following that um and I think the reason that non-equilibrium thermodynamics has not been developed I'll sound now very particular to my interest but I think I have uh hope that there is something true to that is that the least action principle itself which describes how all objects move has not also being uh used and extended to its full power. And what I'm what I mean by that is that um most areas of physics people are interested in just the conservative list action principle which is kinetic minus potential energy, no dissipation, no randomness. Obviously the areas like plasma physics, fluid dynamics where you have those effects but recently there have been enormous there has been enormous progress in including all the dissipation and and randomness terms in list action principle and um Andres um in 2017 provided a derivation of the maximum entropy production principle. from the this stoastic dissipatively section principle which is a major that's the the maximum entropy production is one of the major debates because there are a lot of people that point to different exceptions but for many people it's the main driver for self-organization of systems but I think actually we're working on that too uh that uh maximum entropy production is a consequence of this increased efficiency and transport of energy through the system and as the system becomes more efficient it could absorb more energy. Uh Jeremy England talked a lot about that and it could dissipate dissipate that energy faster and on top of that the system grows as we saw in our model with this uh interconnected characteristics. So I think that the maximum entropy production yes it correlates with increased uh structure and uh complexity and efficiency but I think it's the byproduct kind of the exhaust of this underlying the the driving force is not the in other words what I want to argue is the system expels the entropy in the environment. So you could ask the question, what benefit does the system have of this expelled entropy? If anything, it it raises the temperature of the environment. It's detrimental, right? But what the system benefits from is absorbing more energy. So it could use it to create better and more efficient structures inside. And it also benefits from minimizing the trajectories and the friction along them to perform its functions more efficiently with with less energy expenditure and faster. And I think these connections between the expanded dissipative and stoastic list action principle and its application to and from there its application to biological and social systems and hopefully the brain. It's not there yet but I see a lot of papers recently defining and working. I've seen least action principles defined for neural networks, for for AI, for all kinds of systems. And I think people are converging on this opinion that we need to look at at something objective that is the systems are having a goal to to get to this most efficient state. They're not just randomly exploring the space. They're they're moving in a direction. So, so my hope is that by uh developing this theory collectively many people from many different areas to have a coherent theory of self-organization in all of these systems and also to add that I think a lot of things have been rediscovered in a lot of areas. I mentioned optimal control theory. Yeah, it's based on the least action principle. It's used in economics and in social systems. It's optimizing for different characteristics that I mentioned in the model. But um very few people in in physics are interested in it because they say oh weed in atoms, molecules like fields and all these other systems there somebody else should deal with them. And at the same time a lot of the biologist and people they are extremely smart people but but we are limited in our brain capacity. We can be experts in every field. We I I'm not an expert in chemistry and in biology. So somebody in other field will may not be expert in physics. So it's hard to make this interdisiplinary connections. We talked a little bit earlier about this empty area between the disciplines between because we are so specialized in our own areas and and we have very limited brain capacity to become absolute expert in that next area and make that connection right and that's why there is so much in between that we we we haven't explored yet and I think that's where the answers are that's why I'm interested in in this fields. Yeah, lot lot of interesting pieces there. What does the environment as we see order emerge? You know, as we see a crystal precipitate out of a solution, it's easy to say how the crystal changes and grows and scales. But what does the surrounding get? Is it getting is it taking the loss and it is getting disordered or does it become more ordered as well because its topological or dynamic properties also become richer through um re-entry of interactions with increasingly sophisticated systems like ants modifying the environment. That's a key piece. You get certain meanfield behavior and central limit theorem behavior from flocks of birds. However, you get another broader category with pheromone and niche modification because the special case of niche modification is just not doing it. At which point it's more like a transient process rather than something that has this historical element. And so certainly the dynamics of life on earth have been shaped by oxygenation events and by changes and all these different things as well. So the question of whether the environment is sort of like soaking up or possibly even it's like a double downhill and they're both coming to game. I think yeah this is spot on. Yeah, that's the most important question. This is I guess at the heart of the active inference, right? How the system reflects and how closely reflects its surroundings and how internal structure kind of corresponds to that environment. And I think yes, they grow in tandem. they become more complex because even in an ecosystem, right? Every time let's let's imagine one species has a mutation that makes its metabolic cycle twice as efficient to produce ATP than another species. Obviously, they'll outco compete them because they need half of the food to do the same things, right? And if there is drought they will survive but that will change the whole ecosystem. So now all the other species will see a different environment. Obviously that will create this entropy mismatch between the prediction what they know the system is but it changed meanwhile. So they need to adapt to the changes and in this adapt uh adaptivity to adapt they have to change their own internal structure right so the the inter I talked only yes I talked only about the internal structure in this simulation and how what's happening inside the system to to function but it's paramount to not forget that all that happens in the system is based on what's happening in the environment outside of the system. Right? If there is if you stop the energy inflow uh the system the the interior will disintegrate. Right? So it has to find the energy from somewhere and um information plays absolutely crucial role. In fact action in living systems at least cannot be minimized without information. Let's say if you think about the simplest of the simple let's say a simple bacterium right so it will move it will have sensors for light or for a chemical which is food but what is the sensing of light mean well it means it has information where the sun is so it needs to let's say photosynthesize and then it has so if it did not have that sensor and it has to find where there is more sunlight It pretty much has to move randomly like the ants at the beginning of the simulation, but that's the maximum action path. So, it will spend all of its energy before it finds its food. So, it will die. But knowing where the food is, the the end point, it could move more or less on a straight line, maybe like the ants with a little wiggle, but it will get to the food the fastest way. And maybe if you have two different bacteria and one is more sensitive to light and it moves on a shorter line, it will get there first and it will out compete the other. So I think the information is the mechanism through which organisms could find the shortest action path. Yeah, there's a lot I could add. I think part of the mystery there is let's just say the first bacteria to get there died or it modifies it so that a second bacteria can come something like that. Yeah. So then there's some fitness function geodessic path of least action that may or may not have a sort of monotonic relationship with any given phenotype. So how to understand the phenotype distribution as taking a path but not necessarily doing what it first at first glance appears to be doing. Like for example like you you mentioned enzymes efficiencies. So that's like the futile cycle. It's like why are there enzymes that are both phosphorolating and defosphorilating? I'm like isn't that a waste? And it's like, well, yes, if you never had to switch gears, it would be wasteful. But if you need to have some agility, then you want to have both lanes going, even if you pay a small cost to keep both of the directions open. So then it's like again there's some fitness maximizing strategy that doesn't necessarily involve what appears to be maximum efficiency on enzyme synthesis. But it's like yet we know what's here must reflect some draw from that space of paths. But it might be a very curvy line itself relative to that imaginary straight line. And that line might not be doing what we think it's doing. But we can hypothesize that it is there and that discovering it or inferring it would give us deeper insight than merely describing using descriptive statistics. I agree with you that uh well I would go to the Ashb's law of uh requisite variety right that's uh the variet the internal the way I understand it is the internal structure of the system has to reflect the variety of the environment to have a chance to survive right or to to match that complexity uh But in your question, the way I understand your question is it sounds like a redundancy, right? You have some you have two processes for like um that that in some situation one could be turned on in another situation a different could be turned on, right? And uh I I see that. So that's that's the next level of theory, right? You could say, well, I mean, yes, you're right. This system is not doing just one thing, but today it could be in one environment, tomorrow it could be in another environment, right? So, um, let's say in the summer it's hot here. You need one kind of clothes, in the winter it's cold. So, you can't have one optimization function for for all of them. So, you have to match. But in all of these cases, let's say the environment changed and now you have to switch gears to this other mechanism. I don't know if it corresponds I'm not a biologist but I know that gene expression like the uh is the the way that like you have all the information in the DNA but at any given moment you need small part of it and you turn only this gene only that gene depending on what the organism needs at that time. So I think this this provides this uh flexibility when the environment changes for that organism to be able to do I hope the best or the most efficient thing for that new situation keeping the other mechanism just in case when it goes back to the previous one so there is some memory effect it knows that things will change. Yeah, I guess to sort of close with another Buckminister Fuller quote, he said, "All known cases of extinction are due to specialization." And it's sort of like, yeah, even if the bacteria is at 97° and it's adapted there forever and then the niche changes to 92, well, either it has the plasticity at the individual or the population level to adapt or it was specialized to 97, then it went extinct. So, it's kind of like right there is that trade-off because you do better and better more efficiently, but then you become a specialist, you become 10ear track 97° thermal bacteria and it becomes hard to pivot and then fitness is decreased and the system becomes fragile again. Yeah, I think the next level you ask me the first question about the extension of this theory or many other approach will be to let's say here I always say this is very simple like two nodes very simple case very first order approximation uh I'm looking because we haven't described it so far and I'm trying to see how this principle could apply to the simplest case of minimization of one process for action let's say but when the system let's say over the the year there may be or over the day 100 changes in the environment right let's say a bacterium could sit in a pond and there could be sunlight then there could be some chemical coming then there could be another chemical then there could be some perturbation that there could be heat wave and if it you said was just a second ago if it cannot respond on 20 of those it will die. So what will be the overall efficiency? This will be another super kind of efficiency for all of these different processes. Right? So in other words, if the system cannot respond to one of these, let's say some chemical change, it means that when the input comes, it it cannot efficiently process it or turn it into something useful. I don't know how to describe it because it's like in biological terms. But uh that will be an inefficiency in my understanding that it will kill the system because it will spend huge amounts of time and energy to defend itself. But it cannot find the the shortest way and it moves around and around and around and it exhausts all of its energy and dies. But it has to be able to survive. It has to be able to do this in all these different situations and instances. And obviously organisms die. They they can't always adapt to they are not always prepared for whole situations. There have been millions of extinction events. Many many species are not adapted to the human activity today. So yes, one one inefficiency will be one inefficiency in one aspect maybe is a good way to put it. It's enough to kill the organism for that time frame that it happens. And that's very unfortunate. Yes, most ant species are extinct. The ones are here, they're awesome, but most of them are extinct. Um, yeah, they they have probably learned to respond to huge variety of changes in the environment and survive, be robust. That's a question about robustness, resilience and yeah redundancy in the system to ensure that yeah a lot more layers on top of this theory that I talked about. Cool. Well, thank you again for the presentation. Hope to hear updates on the research and and from your group. So, thank you very Well, thanks Daniel and hopefully I will have a chance to talk again in the future and I'll update you if I have something new. Awesome. Bye-bye.