ActInf GuestStream 118.1 ~ Tadahiro Taniguchi "Co-Creative Learning via Metropolis-Hastings..."

> Source: YouTube
> Playlist: GuestStreams
> Duration: 1:10:59 | Uploaded: Unknown
> Transcript method: auto_caption

Hello, welcome everyone. It is August 20th at the stroke of zero UTC on the 21st in 2025 and it's active inference guest stream 118.1. We're here with Tatahhiro Tanaguchi and we'll see a presentation on co-creative learning via Metropolis Hastings interaction between humans and AI and then I will read any questions in the live chat and ask some things about this fascinating research. So thank you for joining again Tadherro and to you for the presentation. Okay. Uh thank you very much for inviting me to this great guest swim again. So I'm from Ky University and today I'll be talking about core creative learning by methics interaction between humans and AI and this is based on our preprint which is recently available on archive. So this is the cocreative learning is a new theory of human in the loop machine learning method. So the I also discuss a corrective predictive coding hypothesis which I have I talked in the previous guest assume maybe you can check it later but as a background of this work okay let me start. So uh here here's here is an overview of our main contributions of this paper. The first the we formally propose co-creative learning and this is a novel paradigm the way humans and AI collaboratively achieve symbol emergence in other words the formation of the external representation by mutually integrating uh their partial perceptual information to build a shared representation. So this fundamentally shifts the perspective on human AI alignment or teaching process moving beyond traditional unilateral unilateral approach. The second we introduce an experimental framework based on the Metropolis Hastings naming game and through this framework we propose the comparing empirical evidence demonstrating that human AI peers can effectively engage in this creative learning process. So uh the visual the of this right and illustrates uh the idea of mutual interaction between the human and the AI uh centering around the shared world. Okay. So let's consider why correlate learning is so crucial currently in in this at this phase. So the first one is limitations of unilateral alignment or teaching. Traditionally unilateral alignment remark or teaching but typically supervised learning based on ground truth levels provided by human annotators have significant limitations. For instance, AI systems already excel beyond the average human performance in many areas. uh possessing the distinct and often superior domain knowledge. The furthermore the human and AI inherently have heterogeneous knowledge. Our uh our our ways of understanding and processing information are fundamentally different. So when and also when embodied AI agents start exploring the world autonomously, it becomes questionable where whether that we should enforce our existing human knowledge and values as a sole ground truth. So we should respect some in some sense we should respect AI's perception and our knowledge to bring our knowledge better status. Okay, another thing is the birectional the influence. So actually the large language models for example actively impact the human language use and decision making as shown by recent studies. This the mutual influence clearly highlights the limitation of the perspective of purely one side alignment strategy teaching strategy. Therefore, looking beyond the current genative AI era, it is important that we establish a new systems theory the principle and the learning method to achieve a true human AI symbiotic the symbiosis considering by directional alignment or teachings and that can be called co-creative So uh to push on co-creative learning more intuitively from the machine learning perspective let's briefly and roughly review existing traditional uh unilateral machine learning frameworks. So the in the most common the insup supervised or the reinforcement learning the human's perspective the P uh this human perspective can be written like that the XN human is the human's observation and SN is a kind of the uh cross level or description of the the uh human's uh perceptional information. So the we form the the in our society we form the relationship that between the the labels and the particial information in some sense. So and this is effectively serves as a ground truth or the target or re reward the source of reward for the AI to learn from. The AI's understanding is therefore fundamentally bounded by the human's perspective. So in in contrast in unsupervised or self-supervised learning the AI agents learns in isolation inferring knowledge uh sorry from its our own observations. In this case, in this case, its understanding is bounded only by the limits of its own perceptual data. So a key takeaway take away from from both that these traditional approach is that the only partial information is a human or AI is used for the learning process. So this highrise a critical limitation. The nether approach fully leverages the combined uh potentially richer information available when humans and AI interact. So this bring us to our proposal the new bilateral frameworks called creative learning. Here the goal is not for one agent to teach the other but for both to engage in bidirectional message passing through rankage games and communication to integrate their partial observations. So instead of trading one agent's perspective perspective as a so truth the running target for the diet that becomes the true posterior distribution uh conditioned on the joint observation of both agents here X and AI and X human uh this is crucial distinction. So by integrating integrating their distinct and partial information uh this approach allows emergent shared understanding to surpass the knowledge uh and uh perception that either the humans or the AI the AI could have uh have formed alone. The diagram on this slide illust illustrates uh this mutual interaction and the formation of a joint uh more complete understanding. So and but uh you know how can we do this that that is a question and before diving into the today's main topic let me briefly introduce or review the corrective predict coding hypothesis which I proposed last year and gave a talk in this uh guest stream last time so uh this hypothesis extends idea of well-known predictive coding to social and linguistic phenomena. So it states that simple systems that including language are formed through collective predict coding by humans. In other words, a human society uh which can be regarded as symbol emergence system the systems performing symbol emergence that technically can be understood as a social representation learning system. As a result, the information of the world may be encoded in the distributional semantics of our language. The hypothesis also suggests that this is why large language models appear to understand the word they inherit uh this structure through vast amount of distributional the distributed human generated text. By the way, uh the diagram illustrates this complex process the where the emergent where the individual uh inference and action loop contribute to an emergent the symbol system that in turn constraints the organizes corrective behavior. So let me illustrate. So the maybe the uh the explanation was too quick. So let me illustrate the CPC hypothesis collective predictive coding process the bridging the idea of emergent communication and the predictive coding or free energy principle. First let's start from the predict coding or world model learning. So um there's a person they internally he uh intern he or she internally has internal representation of a world models and we are uh living uh with action perception group. So uh this is very roughly this is very roughly speaking the inference process but we humans we are so many and through communication we form language. So following a p predictive coding hypothesis through language game the we can form language like social the represent external representations through the this learning total learning process. I think through this process we model and adapt to the world collectively. So but here let me take another view until now we believe we assume that each person is an independent and autonomous agent but let's change uh and take another viewpoint first language is here language is a kind of a system and uh they have sensors or also actuators That's us. The language uses utilizes us to model the world through interaction. From this viewpoint uh we are subordinate uh to the language system because this kind of view is of mentioned in sociology or other social science area or cultural psychology. So I think this kind of dual viewpoint is very interesting to extend our view of cognition to the social viewpoint and actually this dual viewpoint actually uh gave us opportunity gives us opportunity to formalize this process the from the viewpoint of free energy principle. So the based on the genative model representing a CPC I mean this uh kind of the the language model let's let's let's consider a language is a kind of brain having this these uh sensor sensor model systems. So the following the graphical model the proise geneticity model the describing such kind of process uh we can define the free energy in the same way as the normal usual the free energy principle. Interestingly uh that we can uh based on uh okay that we can naturally uh derive this kind of formulation and uh interestingly the the final form can be divided into two parts. So the first one is an ordinary variational free energy term and this is sum of the variation of free energy of a number of agents. In addition to that, an interesting term pops up. We call this a collective regularization term. This term tries to align agents external representations w and uh uh with each agent internal representation z. With this time the problem of minimization individual free energy free energy becomes a min minimization of free energy of a single total system. I think this book can extend the free energy principle from the individual to the collective uh level with a clear relationship to the emergence of symbol systems or language. Okay. So the as the simplest in instance of the theory of collective predicted coding uh let me introduce the metropolis hastings naming game which we previously proposed. It is a type of language game built on the solid mathematical foundations. Uh this will serves as a as a basis of co creative learning. I will introduce later. Okay that how does it works? So here's the ide per perception phase the speaker and listener the observe the same object and infer their interative representations. We assume joint attention here which is crucial for human language acquisition. And next in communication phase the speaker proistically utter a name for the object. The listener then determine if it accept the naming. The accepted naming uh or not uh with a certain probability the probability depends on the the its current uh belief state. uh specifically this probability show probability as shown in the equation uh on the slide reflects how well the listener's belief matches the name proposed by the speaker. So if a listener agent does not find the incoming sign believable it can reject the proposal naming and this ability to reject is crucial. The third the learning phase after the communication the listener update its internal parameter are related to representation learning and naming and finally a turn taking turn taking step the speaker and the listener alternate as their role and the game continues. Overall this is a very very simple game but importantly this game has a solid mathematical basis. So uh let's dive into the detail. The if acceptant decision is made according to this probability, we can mathematically prove that the naming game is equivalent to the metal processing algorithm for basian inference of the shared representation that shown the in uh in this figure on the left. So let's begin the with this uh graphical model. So here O A and OB or we can rename this XA or XP the represent the visual observation of each agent uh they are uh the agents with the visual input here but but any kind of input is okay basically that is uh Z A and Z B are the internal representations latent variables we also assume existing of a variable W which serves as a prior for these two observations to uh two internal variables. So if we treat uh W as a latent variable this graphical model becomes very similar to the multimodel or multi- view a variational autoenccoder or latent variable models. And if the two agents brains were directly connected directly connected and could be uh could could use the both observations simultaneously. Yes. Uh this variable the can be inferred the in the in the natural way and would encodes the combined information from both agents input. However, in reality uh they are independent cognitive systems. So the algorithm so let's introduce a trick that algorithmically we can decompose the model into two part. So left hand side agent A and right hand side is agent B. So and we let's consider the kind of alternative the inference the method for this W. Now think about the sampling process. Agent A propose propose a candidate of latent variable WD by sampling from its posterior distribution and uh the proposed value is passed to agent B. The agent B can decide whether to accept the sample from a sample the based on certain probability. So this is this process is the uh this process can be designed that by using the metropolis hastings algorithm which is uh which is a kind of march Monte Carlo MCMC. So actually the under certain conditions this guarantees that shadow signs are formed and uh uh and that categorize categor that uh that categories emerges among the agent to approximate the posterior distribution uh based on the agent's observations. So and importantly this the what I explained here is mathematic is uh completely equivalent to this uh naming game. So it is proves that this naming game itself is basian the inference approximate basian inference procedure. So this is a very important point this is very important point. So then in the previous paper uh we tested uh this idea on some data set and we showed that the agent uh two agent playing met naming game can effectively integrate uh their the partial information and form the sign form and share signs signs I mean the categories the how say across the agent and Actually such kind of process even uh even outperform the learning result achieved by a single agent. So the without any ground truth this kind of method voice hasting interaction can improve the representation learning process you know in some sense the knowledge the formation process. Okay. So this is the background and uh actually actually after this the computation study you know the we the as as you see as you saw in my talk I always assume that this is a this is uh something happening that in our society human. So uh to to show that we need to check we need to validate that if the this kind of things is happening in human interaction. So we designed an experiment to test whether human participant when playing a game similar to the MH metropolitics naming game would follow the acceptance probability calculated uh by the algorithm. The results as shown in the graphs on the right are positive. We found that the human acceptance behavior indeed the mostly aligned with the theoretical theoretically derived image acceptance probability. This is crucial finding because it suggests that humans to a certain extent follow similar patterns to the metropolis hasting naming game providing empical support for the idea that human behavior on simple emergence might follow a CPC mechanism. Uh this paves the way for our recent work integrating AI and human into this framework. So this is the beginning of actually today's main topic. So a simple way to introduce co-creative learning is to view it through the lens of a metroping style interaction between human and AI like this. So okay let's jump into uh this section. So given this insight uh we then move to the core of our current work the realization of co collective predictive coding within a human AI collaborative system as depicted uh in this graphical model. We envision the system where a human and AI agent uh each with partial observations engage in bilateral message passing through language game or communication. This interaction facilitates the in the formation and influence of a shared understand shared representation and uh represented uh by the QSN. This is a kind of sign and shared latent variable and X AI and X human. This means the AI's observations and humans observations. Okay. And this uh is what we define as co-creative learning. The key idea here is that uh instead of one agent simply teaching the other the both mutually integrates their partial perceptual information. The display process enable the enabled the by by the mechanism like the MH energy metab allows them to jointly construct a richer shared external representation uh that neither could achieve alone and this is a direct instance uh in in instantiation of the CPC hypothesis in a human AI. I triad. So more formally to be prepared t we formally define cocreative learning as an interactive decentralized via inference process as shown in in definition one uh in our in the preprint the through message based uh message based update like the metrop game uh jointly construct uh local belief distributions S the crucial aspect is that this process ensure the expected a corrective energy fd decreased over interaction steps. This means that the mar chain formed by their interactions converges to the true posterior distribution uh conditioned on a joint uh observations of the both AI and the humans. So what's remarkable about this mechanism is that it allows for in improvement of multicar multicar estimates of the evidence p uh x ai uh x uh human without requiring either agent to disclose their private observation or internal gradient. So this decentralized nature is a key advantage in enabling robust and private knowledge uh co construction. Okay. So with this formal definition in mind our primary objective for this experiment uh was to empirically test uh this concept. We conducted an experiment where joint attention naming game that this is a this is a kind of the you know the uh experiment experiment the with participants the to asking to play the play the mage naming game like you know naming game. So was played that this this game was played uh between human participant and the computer agent. The central question we aim to answer was uh can the human and the computer effectively integrate their respective partial observations through this naming game. So thereby the engage in the decentralized basian inference or as we term it co-creative learning. To ensure this, the each agent was given only a partial a missing subset of the full observation information of observational information. As you can see in this diagram, the human might have certain dimension of features and while the agent has others and some are missing for each. So this setup makes accurate categorization impossible based on solely on individual information thus necessitating information integration through communication. Uh we wanted to see if they could collaboratively fill in this uh missing piece and uh reach a shared understanding. So uh let's detail let's detail our material methods the stimuli consisted on image images depicting sub with a radial notch. So these were generated based on fivedimensional vectors sampled from one uh of three uh ground truth gausian distribution and use using the ci lab space which is perceptually uniform. So the uh parameters were chosen so that categories would overlap significantly in the partial observation space like this. The crucially as as shown in figure uh this fig this this part humans and computer agent receive different partial observations. Human participants view uh grayscale uh rendered rendering the based on the original figure and uh and uh yeah. Okay. and uh the and the agent agent only can see the color color information. Uh this pass observability makes accurate categorization impossible based the story on individual information. So making communication essential. So that datad's task was to collaborate the categorize these simul into up to three uh categories. The yes the ABC by playing the naming game. Uh figure this side figure B uh illustrates experimental proced procedure flow the involving initial categorization in shadow categorization and uh and the naming game and uh ro switching. So this is actually very difficult task for human participant as you can imagine. Okay. Uh this is a very the this process. The the slide show a screenshot of the experimental interface used in our uh experiment. First participants were asked to categorize the given images uh by uh dragging then into lab boxes as seen on the on the left. The during the naming game uh one uh one image is presented on the right on the right and the naming agent the propose a name or sign for the imaging by clicking the button. The listener then decide uh whether to accept uh the proposed uh proposal name by clicking and accept or reject sorry the instruction is in Japanese. The after this decision the listener is prompted uh to revise their own categorization if needed. This intuitive inter interface supports the partial observation and the sign exchange uh between the human and computer agent facilitating the inter interactive process. Okay. So the experiment was conducted online via web browser. We recruited 90 participants through crowd works uh crowd sourcing service and after filtering for engagement and uh adherence to instruction 69 participants were included in our final analysis. The experiment typically uh lasted about uh 90 to uh 120 minutes like 2 hours. the with participants receiving compensation for their time. Okay. So for comparison participants were divided into three distinct group. So each uh interacting with computer agent employing a different acceptance strategy. The for human proposal group one the image group the metropolis hastings engaged with an AI that accept that accepted the proposals based on the metropolis hastings acceptance probability uh serving as our primary co-creative learning condition. Group two, the always accept group that interacted with an AI that always accept proposals acting as a proxy, a proxy for traditional supervised learning. You know, the humans suggestion is always true. Finally uh group three the already reject group the communicated with an AI that uh the already reject human proposals the mirroring and unsupervised learning scenario. So the uh AI just learn the form categories the from the observation. These conditions allows us to uh systematically evaluate the effectiveness of the MHNG in facilitating co-creative learning. So uh let's look at the result for clustering accuracy measured by uh adjusted randics ARI. Table one summarizes the initial and the final mean ARI score for both human and computer agents across all groups. A key finding is that the participants in MH group achieved the highest categorization accuracy and sign agreement particularly on the AI side. uh when compared to both the always accept and always re reject group. Uh specifically specifically the computer agent the in the MH condition a computer agent in MH condition uh achieved a significantly higher final mean ARI. This clearly indicates that the image based interaction most effectively facilitated shared understanding between human and AI engaging a more collaborative and accurate modeling of the world. So while interacting uh generally helped the human improve the uh image mechanism was uh uniquely effective for the AI agent to leverage the interaction for super uh superior performance. Okay, to visualize this trend in this figure, figure three plots the mean AI over the 200 communication steps for both human and computer agent. uh in the condition the you can clearly observe that the the both the MH and the AA uh all acceptance are always acceptance condition show a general trend to increase ARI for both humans and computer indicating a successful information integration and learning the learning from interaction and uh In uh contrast, the a condition always reject uh condition where the AI always reject proposal show uh relative to no improvement from the initial categorization accuracy especially for the computer agent. uh this graph vividly demonstrate the superior performance and the running trajectory achieved under the metropolis hasting direction particularly uh for the AI agent. Okay. Uh beyond the beyond just communic uh categorization accuracy we also evaluated the sign posterior distribution convergence. So as highlighted the in table one the MH group achieves the highest convergence the between the agent's final sign distribution and the target posterior distribution derived from the combined model. uh this this indicates that uh the MH based interaction most effectively guided the diad towards the emergence of a shared the informative science system that truly reflect the integrated Now while human participants in the image condition also show the high high agreement uh the difference compared to the always accept condition was not uh statistically significant. So uh however the AI's performance in the MH group was significant superior demonstrating the its ability to converge the interaction to align its understanding with the humans uh leading to a richer shared the representation as indicated by the convergence toward the s given x ai and xuma to summarize our discussion The experiments clearly show that the human AI pair can successfully engage in cogreative learning via the joint attention naming game. So uh under partial observation the metropolis hastings acceptance rule significantly improve categorization accuracy and agreement that compared to both always accept and always reject control conditions. uh this is evident in the AR I graph AI graph and the sign agreement score we just discussed. Furthermore, a crucial finding was that the human acceptance behavior aligned uh closely with the theoretically derived metrop Hastings probability as shown in figure four. this figure uh this reinforces the idea that the mechanis mechanism enhances a p perceptual integration and effectively facilitates decentralized basia inference within human AI diet. The deal findings collectively suggest a promising direction of the designing truly symbiotic AI systems system that run with human by fostering the emergent so uh interactiondriven alignment moving beyond the limitation of the traditional unilateral unilateral approach uh to the to to AI development. Okay. So while uh our findings are highly promising, we acknowledge several limitations in our current studies that we utilized actually simple the artificial gen artificially generated visual stimuli and categorical signs. So this control setup was necessary for initial validation I believe but uh it naturally limits the generalizability of our findings to complex the complex real world tasks involving richer semantics and natural language uh such as those handled by large language models. The additionally our joint attention naming game paradigm assumes a perfect joint attention between agent. So in real world interactions the attentional alignment can fail. So which is an important uh important aspect for future research. And looking ahead we identify several key future challenges. Uh these include uh scale uh scaling to richer modality and semantics robustness to imperfect attention uh designing real time coive system and understanding emerging dynamics in large scale systems and al also ethical and uh interpretability concern is also important I think so and uh actually the to build the a truly symbol otic uh human AI society. So how do how to integrate this kind of idea to the practical applications? That is also important topic. Okay. Uh that's all from my side. I thank you very much for your attention and I look forward to further discussion. Okay. Thank you very much. Thank you for the talk. Awesome. All right. I will ask a few questions that I wrote and I will copy them into the chat as well. And for anyone in the live chat, please feel free to write questions and I'll copy them in. All right. So, first comment and question. The task focused on categorical discrete as well as quantitative aspects of situational semantics played via a language game related to sharing information about a shape in a shared world. What kinds of AI human tasks do you think this kind of algorithm could be used for? For example, do you see it in the domain of the text chat or a robotic setting or just in other words, &gt;&gt; which application directions do you find promising or most able to demonstrate the differences and strengths of the framework compared with the unilateral supervised or unsupervised learning systems? &gt;&gt; Yeah, thank you very much uh for great questions. there actually that I should ask that I should add the in explanation. So actually the maybe that this this experiment itself looks very uh how say simple and categorical categorical uh sign information and uh this but uh now what I want to uh show in this uh talk and in this paper is the kind of the very the basic uh basic validation of this approach creative learning. So and uh this kind of this graphical model and this setting is not limited to the categorical setting and also the you know the uh small number I I mean the uh simple uh visual image and actually so as I mentioned what I did is uh swapping the one agent in this the kind of the naming a language game the swapping the by swapped by the by a human participant. So actually this kind of approach collective predictive coding based approach is now the extending to many domains. So uh let me share the okay so it's a kind of appendix slide. So actually this uh uh approach was extended to the multiple agent and uh also the multi- aent reostment running and also the importantly the you know this is also another blueprint we recently shared. So this approach uh can be extended to the more complex tasks. So uh this is uh for example this this paper uh is dealing with uh the kind of the captioning game not the naming game captioning game. So between the two visual language model agent you know the one agent receives a a natural image and describe it in the natural language. Okay. So they receive the another agent receive the text. text is just a picture you know a sequence of uh categorical variables and that can be uh treated in our framework in a in a similar way. So actually that we showed that uh this kind of process improve uh has successfully integrate the two agents the knowledge of the vision lage models. So I think we are now we are as many uh researches now ongoing. So I think that we can uh I believe uh we can extend this idea to the large language model setting and also that we can uh say that now as you know currently in robotics field visual language action model visual language action model is gathering attention. So maybe we can uh consider the how can we the extend this idea to such kind of robotic scenario as well. Awesome. Um okay, next question and then I'll read from the chat. Okay. How do you see this in terms of converging to a shared stable truth versus situations of novelty like cocreation of art or research where there's not necessarily a pre-existing ground truth even of a latent kind to converge to. I'm thinking about situations where the agent models have overlapping information which is redundant though robust or non-over overlapping information which is useful though fragile and then also information that maybe neither agent has. So, h how do you adapt the situation to to tune whether you're looking to kind of find an existing compromise versus move into a third space that might be different than what either agent has or knows. Thank you very much for your great question and actually that's very very very uh interesting uh topic and uh interesting interesting uh discussion point. So actually the mathematically speaking so if the if they don't have the shared information sh I mean the you know the uh observation the contain does not contains shared the information. So it's very difficult to uh I I I I expect that the it's very difficult to form the shared uh representations and uh reach agreement in some sense. So and uh but uh the it's very and but I didn't have I don't have the empirical evidence about that on the with some experiment but I think that this is now is very important uh step to conduct an constructive studies studies to analyze such kind of what kind of phenomena happens with uh this kind of you know basic mechanism for emergence and the formation of shared the representation and also now maybe the this is a kind of the somehow a bit outside of the today's topic but I think that this kind of scenario can be find uh in the democratic discussion in our society as well. So the I think the one of my student is working on the the topic about the relationship between collective political coding and democracy and digital democracy. So the if the two agents uh don't have the shared experience uh it's very difficult to have to reach or to reach agreement and also the you know the diff very if they have a very different belief system the it's uh it's the will I say it will become very difficult to agree. So then that such kind of thing this this kind of mechanism is somehow existing the behind the curtain of the current the social division or system. Yeah, I think that the currently I'm very interested in the connection between the you know this kind of computational research and the simple emergence representation learning stuff things and the social science uh topics as well. Thank you very much. &gt;&gt; Yes, that makes a lot of sense. I guess just speculatively if two agents are in a shared environment with a simple optima to be reached or at least a gradient to be followed at least there's a norm to which the gradient could be followed or local or global optima could be reached. But if you have agents that are in two different environments, &gt;&gt; you kind of lose even the possibility of a guarantee because if it's like if two people are in two different rooms with two different temperatures &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; there's no guarantee they would converge to the same air conditioning. &gt;&gt; But if they were in the same room with a shared air conditioning, at least they could. Yeah. Okay. Oh yeah, go ahead. &gt;&gt; I think very it's very interesting to think over the kind of the how can we how uh should we in how can we improve the design of communication and how can we how uh should we uh consider the the envir the difference of environment uh to the achieve the mutual to you know uh to how say to understand the mutual their understanding between uh two or more agents something like that. Sorry. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Sorry. &gt;&gt; I'll read a question from the live chat. If if anyone else has a live chat question, they should write it. So Frederick Kintanar wrote, "In your model, how do you approach the difference between the way silicon agents and humans model the concept level of words in context? AI is opaque. How can this be improved for interpretability? &gt;&gt; Okay, thank you very much. That's also very much important point. The in our framework the most important part of our framework is uh uh that uh we totally deal different how say totally deal with a system kind of decentralized system. So the in the one of the most important part of this mechanism we the each agent uh need not look into the the the internal phenomena now of the counterpart agents. So the even in the computer agent settings the what the agent a do is just a kind of the uh utter the giving sign to speak something and listen and uh and determine the if it to accept or not by itself. So, so the there is no you know there is no need to uh kind kind of look into the other agent variables you know so the so this you know the actually the in the similar studies in emergent communication some many studies uh how say uh ask to pass the kind of the gradient of the parameter through agents you know so across agents it's impossible for human but but uh in this setting uh we don't need to do that so actually that in this mechanism we just consider the counterpart agent as a black box so what we did in this framework is is in concrete learning is just swapping the blackbox by human agent and just expect the human human behavior follows the maming game based mechanism algorithm. So actually so uh to that end uh to validate that so we did conducted uh this experiment previously and we somehow found that the human in this kind of setting human actually follow the image algorithm to some extent and also the in this experiment again again we uh checked that uh the human behavior is similar to the MH algorithm and as a result that we can expect actually expect that the total the correct pre- energy uh can be discre decreased uh through this interaction that is a scenario and uh regarding the explanability that is a very how say the difficult question and we need to consider and uh but you know but uh in uh in the uh how say in the series of studies of explanable AI. So the definition of explanability as is how say very somehow uncertain you know the pleasure and and actually the uh explain I'll say uh even the in the current large language model the explanability I mean the what happening inside of the neural network is a very challenging problem And uh how say the human how say in I think that the similar problem can be found in this scenario as well. But uh anyway so when we introduce uh this kind of idea idea to our society uh we assume that uh uh a a uh not just a follower of or students of human. So the human can be affected human decision can be affected uh by AI. So maybe the of course that we need to reconsider the escal issues and uh explanability uh based on such kind of assumptions. Sorry the the my answer is not perfect but yeah that's comment from my side. &gt;&gt; Great. Okay. And one more question I wrote in a comment in the chat. So &gt;&gt; you mentioned different ways of communication amongst AI, human AI and human humid diads and groups and I think the relevance of understanding and modeling and creating high integrity settings for these communications is clear. So what might these communication strategies look like? For example, let's assume that we can do realtime language translation between mother tongues like Japanese or English. From there, what kinds of games might be possible? For example, would that high bandwidth communication still look like how are you doing? What are you up to? Or could there be some structured communication games like captioning or joint classification which could engage shared attention in ways that were previously impossible and discover new global free energy optima thank you very much for your questions. I'm now h and uh try to grasp the point we can do real time language translation mother like uh from there what kind of game &gt;&gt; if everyone could speak and hear in the natural language that was most comfortable to them what would be the semantics of the language games that would support high bandwidth High bandwidth communication. Uh you mean the the so what what what does the real time language translation means here? So everyone can this means everyone can understand. So what? &gt;&gt; You can speak you can speak in Japanese and hear what I'm saying in Japanese and I'll hear what you say in English and I could speak in English. So we're using some AI system to auto translate what we hear and say in close to real time so that so we can have a natural conversation with our mother tongues. So then I'm just kind of curious and and wondering whether then we would have a sort of normal like on the street conversation or whether your work is providing some situations or structured games like kind of like language chess where we could play a game together like captioning or classification that could be used to reduce the free energy on a joint distribution in a way that would be like faster or different than just asking about your day or your friends or your family. Okay, thank you for your question and uh I'm not still uh I'm not sure if I got get the the point clearly but the basically the I know imaging game the naming game or captioning game uh this is kind of a very very small subset of what the what's happening in our total language game the in our society so the the actually bas Basically the our assumption is that the our assumption or our uh idea is that the the language the the formation of language or symbol emergence itself is a part of the adaptation to the environment and uh you know that's totally somehow same as uh collective uh the predictive coding and uh active inference. And uh so the the you know so I I I I don't have an answer to this uh question uh but uh uh how say so you know the we share some task we share some task or some environment if we are human the that's task so maybe gradually the our way of communication uh gradually change and optimize uh to the uh to the shared task or shared environment the that's my idea and I don't know the kind of the I don't know the connection with the the real time translation uh how say the the discussion point so is it okay I don't know &gt;&gt; sorry I I think it's uh a mystery for us and others to explore in the future. Like if we were fluent, &gt;&gt; in hearing and speaking to everybody, what would we talk about? Like if we knew every language perfectly and we could communicate to to everyone and everyone could be included in the conversation, &gt;&gt; would that conversation look like just meeting somebody at the bus stop? Or I think your work provides some structured settings where the information content of communication could be quantitatively analyzed and different contributions and proposals could be understood in terms of how they contribute to co-alignment. Um okay and &gt;&gt; think of it. &gt;&gt; Yes, last question. So what are your next research directions or questions and what milestones or developments from your group and colleagues or in the broader AI space are you looking out for? &gt;&gt; Okay. Uh thank you very much. The in the relation with the development of AI system. So the one thing is that uh how can we uh integrate uh this idea into LM the agent systems and the BM and the vision action model and actually so one of the you know the the for the basically the you know CPC the original idea is uh CPC and the simple emerging systems. So the I I would like to uh jump out the from this kind of agent viewpoint but uh I think that this is crucial to consider the how can we how can we form the language system or shared the belief system together with other agent. I think it's crucial for human intelligence I think and the cognition I think and uh the the and from this viewpoint we can I think we can integrate the human and AI and robot uh to this system. So and that can bring us to the next step of AI human and AI the symbiotic society. So that is important point and the first step one step is to the make the this kind of system work the with AI and robot I mean that you know I showed the BM the image captioning game system. So actually that's actually imp improve the performance of BM and uh also that I can I think the area that can can be uh say the you know the kind of the decentralized or much agent system can be uh reformulated from this viewpoint and also and uh we can put the human agent uh to such such kind of ecosystems you know. So uh of course the human area interaction uh can take time and uh and through that process so can learn from the human participants the you know adaptively but at the same time so inevitably human agents can be be affected by M's output but in In many discussion this kind of the phenomena is regarded as just a bias or bias somehow the bias is constant to be considered a negative thing negative thing but you know the such kind of bias can be regarded as a kind of the knowledge the from AI agent as well. So the we I think that the the the most important one of the most important next step is to formalize this kind of interaction from the viewpoint of the collective free energy minimization and the language image like language game and uh you know produce the the kind of qualitatively different the human AI AI uh system and that uh hopefully guarantee the co-creative process and that is the most important uh step uh forward. Yes, thank you very much. Thank you. A great way to end it. I really appreciated the presentation. I think that the comparison of makes it clear that both of the unilateral frameworks have fundamental limitations and that a co-creative path is a great joint distributional future. Thank you very much. Thank you. Okay, till next time. See you.