Course — Module 05 — Think About It

How fast can you run? What makes you go faster? (Stronger muscles, more practice!)
Can you wiggle your ears? Why is it hard? (Not many nerve strings connected there!)
What happens to your muscles if you use them a lot? (They get stronger!)
Why do babies wobble when they walk? (They are still learning to pull the nerve strings!)
If you touch something hot, you pull your hand away FAST. Did you think about it? (That is a reflex!)
Can you move things with your mind without touching them? (No, you need Action!)
Why do we shiver when we are cold? (Muscles moving fast to make heat!)
How do birds fly? (They have big chest muscles that flap their wings!)
What is your favorite way to move? (Dance? Swim? Bike? Run?)
If you sit still all day, how does your body feel? (Stiff? Tired? Restless?)
Draw the path of a signal: Brain -> Nerve -> Muscle -> Bone -> Movement! Make it look like a road map.
Play Mirror, Mirror with a friend. Start slow, then go fast. Write about what happened when you sped up.
Close your eyes and touch your nose. Now touch your ear. Now your knee. How did you know where they were? (Proprioception!) Draw yourself with your eyes closed pointing to different body parts.
Tie a string to a toy car. You are the Brain, the string is the Nerve, and the car is the Body. Pull the string! What happens if the string breaks?
Act out being a marionette puppet. Have a friend pretend to pull your "strings" to make you dance.
Make a list of ten actions you did in the last hour. (Walked, talked, ate, blinked, breathed...)
Draw a superhero whose muscles are super strong. What amazing actions can this hero do?
Try writing your name with your non-dominant hand. How does it feel? Why is it so hard? (Your brain has not built that path yet!)
Imagine you are an octopus with eight arms. What actions could you do that humans cannot?
Write a silly story about a brain that sends the wrong signal: "I told my hand to wave, but my foot kicked!" What went wrong?