ActInf GuestStream 108.1 ~ Next-Generation AI for Emergent Semantic Communications (Christo Thomas)

> Source: YouTube
> Playlist: GuestStreams
> Duration: 1:08:51 | Uploaded: Unknown
> Transcript method: auto_caption

Hello, welcome. It is May 22nd, 2025. We are in active inference gueststream 108.1 discussing next generation artificial intelligence for emergent semantic communications with Christo K. Thomas. So Kristoff, thank you very much for joining. Looking forward to hearing about the work and also to everyone's comments and questions from the live chat. Thank you to you. Thanks Daniel for the introduction. Um yeah and thank you for inviting me for this talk. Um so I'll be talking about u next generation um artificial intelligence for emerging semantic communication and also uh I would like to express my gratitude to my collaborators my postto advisor Dr. Walit Sad and uh PhD student in our group Omar Hash. Um yeah so I would also like to advertise a bit on uh the upcoming research group I will be establishing as a tenot track assistant professor at Worster Polytechnic Institute in Massachusetts. Uh so therein uh my focus will be uh to work at the intersection of next generation artificial intelligence and wireless systems uh with specific focus on uh resilient and interoperable semantic communication and integrated sensing and communication frameworks. Uh explainable and generalizable AI for next generation wireless systems. foundation models for networking applications and uh developing strong mathematical foundations of cognitive and reasoning driven a architectures. So yeah, so this is an outline of the talk. Um so first I will go over a motivation of next generation a native wireless networks. Um which is uh yeah so then further I will talk about two of my recent research work on semantic communication and further I will uh provide some future perspectives uh which involve emerging language design and uh using active inference. Um so yeah so so if you look at the wireless evolution right now we are at the fifth generation of wireless systems which promised apart from you know cellular uh enhancing the cellular communication um aspects like massive machine type of communication or ultra reliable low latency communication. Uh however 5G could not meet all the promises it uh actually made. Um so yeah as like the you know saying goes usually the odd generation oddnumbered generations are not very successful at their uh what they promise. So if that is true so usually you know the even number of generation so next one will be the 6G. So we can expect more exciting developments in uh sixth generation of wireless systems. Um so in 60 so we are not okay as we move towards making our environments more smarter through know making the network intelligent uh and be able to control the actions of uh distant autonomous agents in the environment. uh so in order to support those applications 6G brings in lot of uh diff more distinct set of challenges like know trustworthiness security and resilience of underlying AI models immersivity sensing a nativity and sustainable computing. So here uh AI is going to play a crucial role in the know design management or um maintenance of different network and device functions. So yeah so such a transition from the fifth generation to a native sixth generation um is expected as we move to sixth generation of technologies. So here the question is why AI native because it can brings in the aspects of know adaptability to dynamically varying uh wireless environment or tasks. It can handle nonlinear signals. Uh it can also bring in lot of resource efficiency uh compared to classical systems. So these are some of the advantages that a nativity provides. However, if you look at the state-ofthe-art of a native networks, so currently the literature is predominantly datadriven a algorithms like you know uh so uh yeah metal laning or autoenccoders, CNN's and right now at know there is a huge hype on using large language models for uh wireless uh network optimization. However, these datadriven machine learning algorithms are plagued by the following disadvantages like uh yeah large data size which is required which which may not be always available readily in a wireless systems. Second is their limited generalizability to changing wireless environments or task. Uh so yeah associated with the limited general service aspect that we need frequent retraining of these machine learning models which means we yeah if if you have to build know communication I mean real time communication and control such are not suitable. So another aspect is they they act like blackbox models. So they lack interpretability and then they require huge computing power. So you know unsustainable computing uh is another disadvantage of these machine learning algorithms. So as we transition from the current a native to next generation a native we must advance artificial intelligence together with the wireless network uh evolution. So that's the focus of few of our research papers regress vision papers that we um uh some I mean that got accepted in the last couple of years. Uh so one paper in in one in one paper we actually discussed how how we can actually used next generation machine learning algorithms like causal reasoning for um diverse um or cross-layer network optimization task. And another paper that actually got accepted at the IT proceedings of IT, we actually looked at a rigorous artificial general intelligence um based vision. Um which I will summarize as follows. So yeah, so next generation wireless systems are not just about communication. So this those will also involve lot of sensing. So sensing act like an eye for the network. So using the sensed information that contains the states of different autonomous agents or cyber physical systems in the environment the network should then act like a telecom brain. So where telecom brain is characterized by distinct um capabilities such as perception which means the ability to generate abstract representations about different semantic concepts present in the data. then using these abstractions to perform or to compute or learn a world model that actually allows it to understand the cause and effect relations among different physical processes in the world. So this world model will allow it to perform or predictions about future networks or environment states and then use that predictions to basically perform action planning on the network. So here action planning refers to not just network actions like you know resource allocation or beam forming but also u designing optimal control actions uh for the autonomous agents in the environment so as to you know guide or know control them um in the way as that the network intend it to perform. So that's the idea of the know telecom brain principle um that we actually envision. So along this direction uh one aspect is the perception or the semant extracting semantics from the data. So further in this talk I'll be talking about know how we can um extracting semantics and then communicating this semantics how it can actually enhance the resource efficiency of next generation wireless system. So that will be the focus of the um uh next few slides. So to introduce semantic communication. So if you look at the classical communication view uh so therein the objective was to know ensure that the messages are recovered at the receiver side with the arbitrary low probability of error as possible. So that is the technical problem. So while doing so we have so far ignored the semantic aspect which means what meaning do these transmitted symbols convey and the effectiveness problem which means how effectively does the received meaning affect conduct in the desired way at the receiver side. So yeah as Shannon has also mentioned the semantic aspects are irrelevant to the engineering problem. However, when we move towards future networks wherein we need um we we have lot of stringent communication requirements as well as lot of other you know intelligent requirements like you know trustworthiness or immersivity as I discussed before uh we cannot continue to rely on just the technical problem. So in order to make the communication resources more efficient uh we must transition to a novel paradigm called semantic communication. So in semantic communication the objective is to transmit the meaning behind the messages. So here meaning actually means only the information that is relevant to the end user. So communicate this information relevant information by building a semantic language between the transmitter and receiver. We call the transmitter to be a teacher and apprentice receiver to be an apprentice. So yeah, so by creating a machine language um the objective is to ensure that perceiver is able to regenerate the meaning uh with high fidelity as possible. So here the question is so what is this semantic semantics actually contained in the uh data. Um so yeah so if you look at the state-ofthe-art one traditional framework is this join source channel coding frame framework. So, so in traditional system we used to separate the source encoding and the channel encoding part. But in join source channel coding framework we actually combine the source and channel encoding to one module. And in deep joint source channel coding we use a machine learning in based encoder and decoder and then train them in an end to end fashion with the goal of minimizing certain semantic loss function. So by training such machine learning models we achieve we we ensure that transmitter extract only the relevant information or relevant features from the data and communicate that information only. So that leads to better compression uh in terms of what is being communicated. However our vision is that semantic communication is not just about you know compressing better compressing the data. So instead so if you can instill machine reasoning at the know transmitter and receiver side let's say receiver has better re I mean u you know prediction capabilities or uh ability to you know generate u missing information so which can be achieved through know instilling advanced machine learning framework. Uh so then we can achieve more minimalism in communication compared to just doing deep joint source channel coding and then if we can instill these generalizable machine learning algorithms that actually ensure that these we don't need to retrain the system as tasks or the wireless environment changes. So that is also very crucial for enabling real time communication and control and another goal is to ensure high fidelity at the receiver side. So in my previous work I have so far tackled these three challenges which I will talk about in detail and but there are also other open challenges like how to ensure interoperable multi-user semantic system when each of the users speak different semantic languages or how to build a resilient semantic communication system. So resilience against any network disruptions that could be due to uh time varying channel conditions or cyber attacks and then how to integrate these SC principles into the current 3GPP standards without introducing significant interoperability and standardization challenges. So those are some open problems that I am currently looking at. uh uh yeah so let me first talk about uh my uh first work on semantics that got uh published in IT transactions on wireless communication. So this is about building a reasoning foundation for emergent semantic communication. So in particular I consider a two two user semantic communication system. So wherein the transmitter um observes the world state and extracts the entities present in the data and then using the entities extracted it computes a semantic state description which I will talk about in later a detail later which is okay denoted by isert belonging to syntactic space and then the syntactic space I mean isert is encoded uh to a representation space and then communicated at the receiver. Receiver extracts a semantic state. Using the extracted semantic state, receiver performs certain reasoning which is denoted by five of set hat. And this recent output is used to perform certain actions on the world state. So here there are two problems that I consider. So one is the reasoning problem. So which involves how to learn the semantics present in the data or how to define these semantics and at the receiver after reconstructing the semantic state how the receiver can perform deductive reasoning and given this deductive reasoning how the know transmitter can um better encode this enode is another problem which is the emergent language problem. So wherein at the start of communication transmitter is not aware of how the what are the semantics that receiver is interested in and the receiver is not aware of how the transmitter is in which language that the transmitter will be going to encode the semantics. So learning this encoder and decoder those are which are formulated as you know probabilist probability distribution given as shown here pi of u given is and pi of given x comma c here actually corresponds to the communication context. So that will be the history of semantics that communicated in the previous time instance. So that is the emergent problem. Yeah. So for so so for the reasoning framework uh we use uh causality from machine learning. So where causality is founded on three different principles. So one is the cosal discovery. So given the uh you know entities present in the data. So here we call these entities as semantic content elements. So only those entities that are really relevant for the end user task. So those those are the semantic content elements. So we learn the cosign effect relations between these entities as a directed as cyclic graph as is shown here. So from causality literature this can be called as the structural causal model and the structural cosal models apart from these semantic content elements it could also involve certain exogenous random variables that are actually uh unknown or hidden from the um uh hidden from us. Yeah. So that's a causal discovery phase. So second phase is the cosal representation learning. So, so when we are given a large dimensional observation, maybe it could be large dimensional antenna measurements. So, we it may not be immediately available be known to us what are the cosal cause and effect variables. So, we need to first convert it to a lower dimensional latent representation involving just the causal variables. So, that is the cosal representation learning part. So do you so during this causal representation learning phase we can actually filter out the relevant and irrelevant variables from the um features extracted from the data. Then finally we have the causal inference phase. So wherein if you are given this causal graph we can perform intervention that actually mean we can manipulate the values of certain endogenous variables here then analyze what is the impact that cause on their effect variables. And then we can also perform counterfactuals that means so given we have observed certain set of entities as shown here. So what would the world stage would be if these know let's say S4 if you want if you if you want to imagine different outcome for S4. So what what interventions on these causes would have caused that. So such imaginary words we can assume using the framework of counterfactuals. So if we can actually okay extract this causal graph and then perform training on this interventional and counterfactual distribution then we can actually attain a level of distribution generalization. So that's the advantage of bringing in cosality and another thing is the explanability aspect that so given this cosal graph we can actually tell like you know uh if you have a cosal graph uh among uh distinct environment variables then resource allocation communication and computing resource allocation variables and quality of service values then we can actually assess if the performance falls below certain threshold. So what are the underlying causes that actually lead led to that particular behavior? So that that's where this explanability aspect is uh coming by using the framework of causality. So now uh okay so using the cosal framework we learn the cosal graph from the data. So learning the cosal graph we formulate it as a factorized posterior distribution where each factor will be the probability of each of these node variables given the its parent. So probability of s1 given probability of so probility s1 given s0 where s0 is the parent of s1. So that probability distribution we can use we we learn using a recently popular a method called generative flow networks wherein we start with an unconnected set of entities and iteratively learn each urge starting from this unconnected set of entities and then at the receiver side after receiving this causal state receiver actually combines these smaller states and then perform a logical reasoning where this logical reasoning is performed by evaluating certain logical formula which is composed of these causal states that are connected by certain logical connective. So it's like evaluating. So okay if this happened uh if the set of okay if these are the set of um I mean if this is the causal state that the transmitter has observed okay then what would happen in the future. Okay. Yeah. So those kind of reasoning or inferences can be um performed using this logical inference uh framework. So for that we use neuro symbolic AI. we cannot uh so we we use a existing neurosyic a method called logical neural network that actually converts this logical formula to a neural network. Uh yeah so that's how we actually perform the logical reasoning at the receiver side. So now uh yeah I will uh yeah I will consider the I will discuss the emergent language problem. So, so in the emerging language problem, the teacher's objective is to ensure that it communicates very less semantic information as feasible. Uh so trans yeah the transmitter is kind of uh u yeah so that's the goal of transmitter. Uh so which is formulated as negative of average semantic information uh at the transmitter side. So semantic information conveyed by the transmit semantic symbol U about the causal state uh is said given the policy given the enor policy as well as the history of causal states at the receivers side receivers's objective is to maximize the reconstructed semantic information. Uh so after receiving U how much information that can provide about the causal state is it had D which is the reconstructed one given the policy of transmitter as well as the uh policy of the receiver and the history of causal states reconstructed with the then there are certain constraints like you know communication cost plus u minus log pt which is an apprentice surprise factor. So which actually tells us how much the apprentices surprised after receiving certain semantic information. So yeah. So here given this contrasting objectives of teacher and apprentice we can formulate this as a two-player signaling game and the Nash equilibrium of this two-player signaling game is uh can be formulated as is shown here. So yeah like apprentice responding to the um given the know teachers optimal encoder policies what's the best response that actually you know apprentice can uh provide that's that that's what this expression actually tells us so we actually solves this through a since given so we actually formulated novel semantic information measures for the transmit side and receive side but we observed that those are non-convex functions so we solved them through an alternating optimization procedure where alternating optimization is performed for some surrogate functions that are convex. So yeah, so this actually evolves this game evolves through a two-way conversation between teacher and the apprentice wherein apprentice asks certain questions about the data set data and teacher responds by providing an encoded version of the u information. So that's how this game actually proceeds. So as I mentioned here we cannot continue to rely on the traditional mutual information measures since we need to quantify uh semantic information here. So as I mentioned here uh how I formulate semantic information is that so semantic information is formulated as the information contained in the logical endailments or logical conclusions that follow from any causal state. For example, if you look at any word like red, there are multiple possibilities conclusion that can follow from it like know red blooded or red ruby, red meat and so on. So those conclusions the information can load into those conclusions that are relevant to the end user. So that will be the semantic information. So we actually analytically formulate this from a category theory perspective where we uh what we did is we form we defined a syntax category consisting of coal states as the object and a semantics category consisting of the conclusion that follow from any cosal state and cooperives corresponds to from a category theory perspectives corresponds to the uh you know conclusions or how we yeah conclusions that follow from any causal state in the syntax category and this logical endance we can map it or we can consider it as a factor from the syntax category to the semantic category. So that's how we actually formulated this semantic information measure and we also discussed received semantic information which can be written as a fraction of fraction equal to semantic similarity of the transmitted information where semantic similarity can be computed by quantifying the overlap in terms of the capriccious of transmitted semantic causal state and reconstructed causal state. Yeah. So further uh yeah so further we perform certain Nash equilibrium analysis. So wherein we first did some equilibrium analysis for some trivial cases like the cardinality of the representation space is one. So that actually means we transmit same semantic symbol for all causal state. So that is minimalistic but you know receiver may need may not be able to reconstruct the meaning with high fidelity. And we also considered the separating equilibrium where cardality of U is same as cardality of W. So that leads to high fidelity of meaning reconstruction but it leads to maximal transmission. So another thing is uh the partial pooling case where the cardality of U is less than the cardality of W. So that leads to a minimal representation at the same time ensure a high fidelity sufficiently high fidelity at the receiver stage. So in this partial pooling case so some interesting insights we got. So so we actually um showed that the the partitioning of the syntactic space occur in such a way that we communicate UK for all causal state that lead to the same semantics at the receiver side. So this partitioning of the semantics causal state uh corresponds to a partitioning in the semantic space unlike a partitioning in the equilidian space for traditional systems. So that's an interesting uh insight that we got from this N equilibrium analysis. So further I conclude this results by know discussing the summary of key analytical results. As I mentioned, we formulated novel semantic information using category theory. And we also derived our upper upper and lower bounds of average amount of bits communicated in an ES emerging semantic communication system and showed that these upper and lower bounds are less than that of a classical system showing minimalism and we also derived semantic error probability measures. So that showed that the lower bound on semantic error probability is always less than or equal to the lower bound on the probability of bit error measure achieved using classical communication system. So what that tells us is that so even if the probability of bitter is may be high still the receiver may be able to reconstruct the semantics with high fidelity as possible. So that means we can uh it's okay to know we can avoid these retransmissions as in classical system and we can maybe transmit at a lower rate. So that means that we must transition to semantic performance measure if we are to make efficient use of communication resources. So that's another insight that followed from these results. So further I would like to discuss some simulation results. So we for the simulation we actually looked at a visual question and answering based data set where teacher communicates certain images encoded versions of the images and then uh apprentices objective is to uh answer certain questions based on these images. So we evaluated this uh the performance of the emergent language um for different tasks where we started with a simpler task where the image only contains maybe one object. So images here contains objects of different shape, color and size and we increase the complexity of this task. So as time progresses what we saw is that uh the amount of u communication rounds required for this emergent language training reduces close to zero. So that tells us that uh yeah the system is this semantic communication system is gaining more knowledge or receiver uh the apprentice is gaining more knowledge as time progresses. uh so then you know because of this more knowledge it can actually avoid retraining for the emerging language so that yeah that way we can get rid of lot of communication over uh yeah so that's the generalizability aspect and we also evaluated the average amount of bits communicated over the wireless network wherein we showed that for our proposed system we almost gain around 100x gain compared to classic traditional semantic communication system that does not incorporate reasoning into their architecture and compared to classical system yeah even much more gain is obtained. So that actually show shows the minimalism aspect that I was uh discussing. So that actually uh concludes the yeah work on emerging communication and next I will briefly discuss um one followup work that we did where we utilize this cosal semantic communication framework for a digital twin driven wireless network. U yeah so this got accepted at at channel on selected areas in information theory. So here one application is as is shown here. Let's say we want to control the operations of certain autonomous robots in an industrial environment. Um yeah using the communication from a base station or an edge server. So herein we assume that okay given that this particular industrial environment will be also uh lot of senses will be deployed in this environment. So using the sensed information the base station actually construct a uh digital twin of the industrial environment and uses this digital twin uh it actually you know using the digital twin it actually computes optimal control actions uh for these autonomous robots in the system. So this is within the framework of semantic communication system and that's what I will be discussing here. So yeah so so here this semantic communication framework again we consider for a two user so pointto-point system wherein the transmitter it's called an expert agent because it has access to lot of sensing information and using the sensed information it creates a world model about the wireless environment or autonomous agent environment uh so basically extract the semantic content elements and no uh generate the coal graph and using the cosal graph it actually computes an expert policy control policy and at the and this okay instead of computing the control policy the transmitter actually computes a cosal semantic representation of the cosal graph and the receiver receiver also has a world model at its end but it creates this world model from the limited communicated information and then it also computes an imit receiver here is called an imitator because it tries to compute a policy uh and the objective is that this policy should be as close to the expert policy of the transmitter as possible and this is achieved using the framework of imitation learning and that's why it's called an imitator agent. So that's the yeah so this policy imitator policy should be such that it is quite close to the optimal expert policy. Yeah. so as to ensure that the semantic effectiveness of the task at the uh receiver side is as high as possible. So that's the system model. So compared to our previous work here in we went one step beyond in terms of defining the in I mean semantic information. So in traditional uh mutual information frameworks it does not distinguish between causal I mean uh directionality of information like where I of X Y is basically same as I of Y comma X. So yeah. So but in in a cosal system we must be able to distinguish between uh I of X Y. If X crosses Y uh then yeah I of X Y should be different when you know uh when it should be different than I of Y X. So this is achieved through the principle of intrinsic information. So given okay let's say assume that sit is the state of the system at time t and IC of sit minus one given sit tells us about the cause information about the cause state which is st minus one um provided by the current state s. Similarly we can define the effect information which is basically the information about the future effect states. So this can be defined using a distance measure between these two probability distribution which is probability of SIT minus one given SIT and property of SIT minus one. Similarly for the effect information and we choose sustained distance here because of this um unique properties that you know the distance is uh symmetric here. So that's the reason why we actually uh resorted to sustain distance here and further we can define the concept of integrated information. So let's say that this SIT is composed of distinct semantic content elements. So okay so our objective is to basically perform abstractions of this semantic content elements by you know filtering out irrelevant states. So we can how we define integrated information for a particular state sit is that integrated information is the information conveyed um conveyed by uh the states beyond that of what is conveyed by the individual semantic content elements. So that actually means that only if okay let's say the semantic content elements are all independent random variables then there there won't be any interactions between these different semantic content elements so then the integrated information will be zero. So once there are some interactions between certain set of semantic content elements so that that means that there are some cause and effect relations between these semantic content elements. So yeah we so those set of states will form a a semantic concept with nonzero integrated information. So that's how we can actually uh know define a semantic concept or extract a semantic or identify a semantic concept from the data. So that's one uh you know yeah um step in terms of advancing the theory of semantic information um that we actually proposed in this work. So further I would also like to quickly discuss uh the methodology that we used for. So as I mentioned here we have to transmitter has to learn the cosal graph uh so which is achieved through cosal discovery and also this cosal graph should be represented semantically. It should have a semantic representation uh which is actually uh represented as isert t here and then yeah so then then the transmitter also has to compute a action control policy which is pi export of action given the state uh future state current state as well as uh the set of sensed variables and then it also has to come up with this transition distribution which is uh represented as a cosal graph. So this okay given that we don't have a um yeah we don't we do not have uh I I mean we do not have information of the true uh posterior distribution of this causal state transition. We actually resolve to uh using a variational biian optimization approach here where we compute an approximate distribution by minimizing the KL divergence which actually can be formulated as maximizing the evidence lower bound. So that's this G expression here and that's how we actually formulated the uh you know cosal graph computation problem and also at the transmit side there is also the problem of computing the semantic states that is achieved as so that is formulated as maximizing the integrated information conveyed by the cosal state about the uh no yt which is the corresponding to the inference variable at the receiver side subjected through constraints on the bandwidth. So how much information this sett conveys about ST should be less than or equal to some threshold. So that actually tells about the bandwidth constraint. So there are two different problems here. So we solved these two problems by formulating this uh cosal graph uh as well as this yeah cosal graph as well as the semantic representation using neural gener generative a based neural networks wherein specifically cosal for cosal graph we used a graph neural network conserved and for semantic state representation um for semantic state representation uh we actually used variational autoenccoder based uh framework work to represent that and we actually solve this two two-level optimization problem by a nested optimization uh using gradient descent. So that's how we actually solve the parameters of the neural network. I won't go into the details of uh yeah details of the problem uh solution. So instead I would like to further state certain simulation results that we had. So first is uh what we showed through this generative a based uh framework is that or the welder model based framework as I discussed here is that um we actually showed that compared to classical uh maximum likelihood based transition modeling our proposed causal semantic communication system uh can better represent the network state uh for all yeah for uh diverse SNR uh ranges compared to classical communic classical systems and also we showed that we showed the generalizability by considering that okay so we started with some particular uh network or autonomous agent environment then after around let's say 6k samples we actually um changed the environment dynamics then we actually saw that the classical systems will take you know the traditional system which are basically datadriven a based algorithms like enco I mean transformer based encoder or decoder that takes large amount of time to actually recur back to the normal state but our causality based system is able to adapt quickly to this uh network dynamics. So that's the that actually proves the dynamic ad adaptability aspect. Uh yeah so that actually concludes my work on coal semantic communication for uh digital twin based um systems. Further I would like to quickly discuss some future perspectives. Uh so as I mentioned uh currently I have been considering only a pointto-point semantic communication system. So my uh next goal is to actually construct multi-user semantic communication system um wherein okay so these set of uses are okay this could be robots or um humans. So they or a combination of them. So they are actually encouraged in solving a particular uh maybe a short task or a uh or distant task it can be. So therein the objective is to design a joint communication and control system. So herein we can consider that each of these user has access to only a partial observation. So basically a case of partial observable marco marco decision process. So that way we can actually formulate that. So using this partial observation and also using the communicated information from other uses each user should form a world model about the environment. Um yeah then the quality of the using the world model that they construct they come up with a shared semantic language or shared symbol system. U yeah so that actually will depend upon the quality of the welder model learned by each of the uses. So here a promising approach is to actually use the perception and action planning framework design a perception and action planning framework through active inference concept. So in this direction uh yeah so I'm actually looking at uh formulating the semantic encoder or causal representation frameworks as follows. So let's say we have a semantic encoder at semantic encoder. So that is defined as an approximate distribution which is Q of UT where U is the semantic symbol and isert T K correspond to the cosal states um pursued at different uses where K corresponds to user index and then cosal representation at each user we can actually consider it as Q of isk given is t minus one UT minus one and here o tk corresponds to the partial observation at user k and yt minus1k corresponds to the inference decision in the previous time slot uh at for for for user k so here observation basically it's like composed of two aspect one is like the partial observation and also like the inference decision that this particular age user will uh make yeah so so basically the causal representation or the the world the world model actually changes uh based on the inference decisions of each user. Um and yeah, sematic symbol prior priorities P of UT and then the logical reasoning and observation model we can actually formulate it like probability of YT + 1 given is T time probability of OT given YT is a T. So observation depends on inference decision as well as the causal state and then the actual transition model will be as is shown here. Uh yeah. So here um yeah so actually motivated by the formulations in this uh recent paper um that appeared in RK we can actually formulate uh the collective u free energy based uh yeah we can actually write the collective free energy for this particular um obser yeah but a particular multi-user semantic communication system um so yeah so wherein I'm not going to the details of this mathematical expression but we can um write this free energy as consisting of three different factors. So one is the reconstruction aspect. So how much the user can actually reconstruct the observations based on the uh cosal world model. And then the second term is actually corresponding to the um cosal dynamics approximation which means how much the user use each user can approximate the cosal um ve model based on the observations partial observation at its end. Um and the final factor will be corresponding to the uh a time that actually regularizes the entropy of semantic encoder which actually means that so this this time would be actually corresponding to the um to minimizing certain communication cost. So or basically uh ensuring that we communicate minimal semantic semantics from the data. Yeah. So we can actually formulate two um phase like an active inference. we can actually um formulate the free energy expressions for the perception phase and also for the inference phase which is corresponding to yeah where y corresponds to the inference variable and yeah so then the objective is basically um using the u yeah the free energy for the perception part we can actually compute the minimalistic semantic encoder or the common semantic symbol system as well as using the inference uh free energy framework we can actually um compute the best inference decision that each user should make using its own causal uh state perception as well as the communicated information. So that's the you know that's the framework um that I think can be applied for this multi-user semantic communication systems. Uh yeah so that will yeah with that I will conclude my talk. So as I uh mentioned um 5G could not meet all the promises. Um however as we move towards next generation system wherein uh our yeah so the communication networks are not just about building better um um wireless I mean better um standard I mean better systems which high data rate or low latency and so on but also incorporating aspects like sensing or trustworthiness or and also autonomous control of uh distant agents So cyber physical system. So we should transition to a telecom brain based vision which is consist of consisting of modules like sensing, perception, world model and action planning. And I discuss in detail few of our work on semantic communication where we actually showed that using causality and neurosyolic AI we can actually build minimalistic generalizable and high fidelity semantic system. So they're saving a lot of the bandwidth. Uh and then yeah the future research vision uh my future research vision is centered around building sustainable trustworthy and socially responsible next ngi native wireless systems using this telecom principles. Yeah. So with that I will conclude my talk and if you have any questions I am um glad to uh answer those. Thank you for the awesome presentation. Okay, I will prepare my questions and also welcome anyone in the chat to write and just while I crop and prepare that just could you share a little bit h how did you come to be setting up the lab like just what was your trajectory from through school on through here? How did you get into this research area? Uh yeah so I did my PhD in um you know fifth generation wireless communications uh with focus on the physical layer aspects like you know building uh developing uh beam forming solutions or channel estimation schemes using conventional signal processing algorithms like know specifically even approximate bias inference kind of techniques. um uh yeah so those are th those are my main focus during my PhD but when I transition to a postdoal position I choose a different path like I mean I yeah I saw that you know uh the physical layer advancements is kind of you know all the physical literature is kind of saturating out so we need some new revolution uh in communication system as we move towards next generation systems that that can Yeah, that can be um feasible by the incorporation of AI but not just you know datadriven AI but um a that can actually reason like human beings. So that's so that is the motivation why I started to work with uh professor valid sad on um this particular topic. Um yeah so that's how I actually entered into know semantic communications uh which is actually a revolutionary approach that u uh that is aimed at build and improving the resource efficiency of future communication systems. Um so yeah so that's that's how I ended up at this um this particular research. Thank you. Well I'm extremely um appreciative to your colleagues and you for bringing this all together and and I'm excited to see where this all heads um because it's aligned with many of my interests and I also believe it's it's a critical infrastructure kind of civilizational technology layer. So first I tried to summarize in one sentence because there are so many pieces and so many formalisms that might be new. So my one sentence summary was dynamics and constraints of semantic transfer in hybrid and synthetic network intelligence systems. And then to kind of expand on that a little bit. So I'll just make a remark about where I saw active inference coming into play and and some of the um important areas. So um you starting with a diatic model uh templated diatic communication models like teacher apprentice or adversarial models. You are looking towards using active inference to allow real-time cooperation and turn taking in multi- aent systems and that would allow the embodiment which is achieved in in different engineering solutions in different ways. However, the top-down approach is what is the analytical formalism that gives a a unity from a um modeling perspective to all of these different engineering approaches. And those formalisms that you presented on allow the embodiment of agent or situation, class, instance, and context specific cognitive mechanisms and dynamics which broadly correspond to perception on the inbound and action selection. and in and on the outbound with reasoning happening in between. And so what that is heading towards is a a first principles approach that applies to semantic dynamics which could be used within a singlethreaded shared database state multi- aent system. So it could be a a system with a very specific logistical order or known computational resource constraints all the way on through nested arbitrary systems and then importantly embodied cyberphysical networks where there can be the explicit introduction of physical and energy models, bandwidth and resource costs. And so that brings a complimentary view from the engineering side onformational and cognitive constraints with important physical constraints of the everchanging basis of networks. So, just kind of wanted to echo back because there were so many important pieces in the talk and it was a lot of information and it's a part of our tech stack that just kind of works like the phone just has service and it's really abstracted and then of course we know that the phones are coming out with different versions and I'm not knowledgeable in these areas that much but it's like services different in different regions and things change and and and technology happens like that. So giving that kind of view into the tech stack is also I think really critical. So usually I do not give a sort of extended comment but there's just I was writing know so many notes. So do you have any thoughts or ideas on on that? Yeah I think you have uh described I mean the summary of this talk and yeah quite well u I mean that that's a great summary. Um so yeah so one point just to uh conclude is that like you know uh so right now with with 5G we are able to get you know large download speeds or um um lower latency you know streaming and so on. Uh but you know the but when we actually move to a next generation system it's not just about cellular communication. So the network should also you know we should be able to build much more smarter environments like you know smarter transportation systems or smarter uh you know industries uh teley health systems. So that actually recurs the network to actually um have a perception about the physical world. I mean if the network has to know uh control the operations of these uh distant autonomous agents uh um so yeah so the network should have a u accurate perception about the physical world um unlike in classical system where uh you know we just treat the communication systems just like a passive passive system. So whatever message comes in you just objective is just to communicate that uh messages with you know um high accuracy at the receiving end. Uh yeah so so that's so that's a transitional um paradigm that you know we are looking at as we move towards 6G or uh yeah 6G and beyond. Yeah, another area I wanted to remark on and and part of that transformation is predictive processing and the role of prediction in compression. So the predictive processing frame differencing is used in standard syntax informationdriven compressive systems like frame differencing in a video. If all you have to do is transmit what changes between frames, it gives a uh within a given local minima of minimal compression and that was discovered in the computer science area and then actually entered into this broader discussion about like visual and sensory systems. So that's using frame differencing to for example transmit a 4K video with less syntactic information flow. And then actually it goes even further with all of your work exploring the transfer in a latent or semantic space which could be more like a primary lexical semantics or conceptual modularity all the way up on through possibly complex pragmatics like action directives or or complex information being shared at at a higher semantic level. And then that's kind of again where active inference comes into play is having a unified framework that on one hand can give an account for why frame differencing at a purely sensory kind of Shannon information level is a compressive strategy and then use on a latent space in exactly analogous formalism a co-operative mechanism to enable semantic compression. So like if if we both have a friend ABC, but we both know them as A, then there's the question of the bits per second of the audio transfer, like how good is my microphone and how much data needs to be sent. But maybe a given bandwidth, you only need to say A because B and C are semantically known. And so that just kind of shows like it's not just about the amount of data transmitted. compressing it, all other things being equal is is good. Why send extra data through the wire? But now, and this is kind of where I want to hear your thoughts on this. We see a lot of work with natural language intermediaries and that is used to transfer information broadly with this kind of natural language interface. Um, but also we could imagine situations where semantic information transfer happens on networks. And I think this is exactly what you were getting at. So what kinds of information can be transferred? Like does transmitting vector embeddings have a marketkedly different semantic impact than for example dialogue between LLM like the kinds of bandwidth that are currently being used in natural language mediated transmission. Could strategies like multimodal or semantic compression give some kind of order of magnitude modifications in the bandwidth or the impact of communication amongst latent space. Uh yeah so yeah so one way to look at is like okay so let's say if you have like know two LLM agents communicating um and let's say okay so they're using this natural language to communicate among them um so yeah so um yeah so so I let's let's say okay so in in semantic communication um so we are not I mean so so we are not really concerned about uh you know how the how LM agent one communicates in a you know grammatically correct um English sentence uh know with all the details included to LLM agent 2 rather we will be more more uh interest yeah we are actually our frameworks actually lead to okay following this um emerging language formulation um so as time progresses what these LLM agents would uh learn is that okay let's say they're still communicating using English uh letters um so they end up learning a language um okay communicating a sequence of words or letters uh that is sufficient enough for the other agent to know understand it I mean it need not be you know it can be considered like a machine machine language which need not be perfect like an English language But no but certain sequence of letters that is enough for LLM agent 2 to actually understand LLM agent one given the background knowledge that agent each agent has um like you know LLM agent one so okay so when when we when two humans actually start communicating okay when when two new uh um yeah so when uh one when I start communicating to another person whom I don't know before so initially there is lot of overhead like you know we have to introduce ourselves we have to share some background knowledge about uh ourselves. Um so then further as they become friends so then when they communicate so they they have a lot of know implicit assumptions about um the other person how that person would be thinking or how that person would be um viewing the world around him. So the communication would actually be more um no more optimized for optimized considering all also that background right. So similar to that so yeah so if two LLM's agent two LLM agents communicate among them so so using an emerging language framework our objective is to build a machine language that is sufficient enough for LLM agent to pursue or understand what LLM agent one actually means. So there is so that kind of a machine language construction uh leads to a better usage of know communication resources. Um so does yeah does that make sense to you? Yes. Like where that kind of takes me is when we're talking about emergent semantics and pragmatics which could be between family members, it could be between strangers, humans, it could be online or in person. It could be two LLMs, it could be a person LM, like every kind of combo. Um, having this approach gives a way to scaffold theformational dynamics and kind of separate out the syntactic layer from the semantic layer. And then it naturally leads to these kinds of uh sustained duration semantic learning strategies. Like if every single message was coming from a different source, then there would be some sort of like no free lunch, but you could take the best semantics as possible to each fresh source. Like if it was just a different every single time. But then to the extent that you can have a um prior about a given type of interaction all the way on through the most specific prior which is exact relational with a given other entity then that allows semantic communication strategies like one means this dinner and two means that dinner. Well then they only have to send one letter. And then when we get into these situations where it can be machine machine semantics then that's kind of what tokens are like that's why words in a given language get truncated up into these essentially probabilistically determined semantic units like oh it's this verb and then ed to be the past tense. So it's like or whatever the tokenization strategy happens to be and then how do you use your tokens to have this no regret or minimal regret best possible token conveyance linearity to finesse the translation of elements of a semantic space which could be static or dynamic into a linearized sequence of messages. And then the network perspective is really important because network properties can matter. Like if you have a network where 100% of packets are delivered, you're going to have c certain kinds of strategic constraints in communication. Whereas if you have a network where a given percent are being at this you know redirected or this kind of etc is happening like those physical constraints do matter for a communication strategy and so having a sort of integrated analytic approach to modeling explicit syntax constraints classical Shannon syntax entropydriven computer science and networking on through abstract cognitive informationational constraints like we're just going to assume that it could be the maximally informative symbol like the letter distribution in natural language could be made more informative. So using some rebalanced even A through Z, there could be increased information transfer, but that would only be in certain situations like a machine machine situation might be able to do that kind of hacking into the actual symbols being set in plain text. But that just again reflects on how there's both the particular network and symbol set constraints that are really really well laid out from a Shannon syntax approach. And then there's this outer space which we're still just beginning to explore that is grounded in the primary symbol entropy and the observations. However, it can have multiple layers of cognitive and metacognitive dynamics which are not so closely bound to the primary Shannon constraints but still do have imported constraints of their own. However, that's what semantic information is about because semantics can be about semantics. I think that was one of the questions on one of the slides which is like cognition on cognition or metacognition. Yeah. So it's it's like a no above this communication constraints that we have we are effectively forming a semantic layer between the transmitter and receiver which is actually know constrained by all this cognitivity um yeah and then the understanding uh aspects right yeah that's very insightful I mean discussion thank you yeah well just in sort of closing, what are your next steps or what are like the timeline with the lab or how would people learn more or get involved? Um yeah, so um yeah, I'll be starting my uh new position from August uh 2025 and yeah, I'm uh looking to recruit one to two PhD students. Um so yeah and also know continue this work with the students on this particular topic and I yeah I mean I do have a uh lab website which is still kind of under construction but you know I can share this I mean I will share all my updates through this website. Um yeah awesome. Yeah happy to uh discuss further or even know give a talk later when when I have more results. Yeah. Cool. Well, again, very appreciative of of the work and the concise presentation. Wish you the best. Till next time. Thank you very much. Thank you for the invitation. Bye bye.