ActInf GuestStream 117.1 ~ Robert Stamps: Active Inference and Artificial Spin Ice

> Source: YouTube
> Playlist: GuestStreams
> Duration: 1:20:23 | Uploaded: Unknown
> Transcript method: auto_caption

All right. Hello, welcome. It's August 19th, 2025. We're in active stream guest stream 117.1 with Robert Stamps who will be presenting on control strategies and predictive coding using magnetic noise. Thank you for joining Robert and looking forward to this presentation and then discussion with and close. &gt;&gt; Close the YouTube on your side, Robert. Okay. Do Oh, should I just begin now? Okay. Yes. Um All right. All right. Well, well, thank you for this invitation. Uh it's uh maybe I should give you a little bit of a background of how I ended up uh doing this research getting interested into this problem because I I'm primarily a condensed matter physicist in computational and theory primarily um and my area of specialization has been in magnetic materials and spin systems in general but I've been doing this for quite a while and about I would guess 25 years ago I was more or less starting my career. I was in Australia at the time and I also had came across a paper uh it was about the theory of flocking and I found that very interesting and that led to one thing and led to another thing and eventually I found myself co-supervising a PhD student who was working with uh an expert in uh psychology on psychopysics and there was looking experiments and analyzing experiments on uh primate visual systems And what I found striking was some of the mathematics we were doing. We were heavily influenced by uh I think about that time in fact just recently a Row and Ballard paper had come out and it was heavily influenced by the the structural form of the mathematics we were doing and it mapped directly back on to some of the things I was thinking about doing uh with magnetic systems at that time. people were just starting to develop a fabrication technique which would allow them to uh make new kinds of magnetic materials and that's what I'm going to discuss today and it occurred to me at that time I remember very clearly that when that technology matured it seemed to me like it would be an ideal one to try and implement some sort of neuromorphic uh designs in and indeed that is exactly what has panned out and so I'll tell you a little bit about that and what the state of the field is now and and that's but that explains more or less how I I began my interest in this kind of cross-disciplinary field and just to put the story back into context and about 3 years ago I had a sbatical I decided to go back to Australia and visit that group and see what had happened and that's when I came across Friston's papers and active inference and uh uh I actually didn't make header tale of them and so I thought well I better put it into some context I can understand and to try and understand exactly what what predictive coding and active inference are about and that helped me and that's where this work emerged from trying to understand that so let me let me begin then so I'll just explain these pictures this is just a schematic of using nanomagnets with an active inference to control some process and then your feedback and this is a schematic of the sort of nano particle arrays which are in this control box. Uh this is my idealized spin system and what this is at the very end I could show you it's it's a a model which is a bit more sophisticated but it actually tries to model properly the properties of real magnetic materials and the point of it was to demonstrate that ywin could implement certain algorithms inside a magnetic context like this. So to begin, let me introduce myself. Uh the people I work with here uh focus primarily on studying both theoretically and experimentally nanomagnets. The experimental parts are led by my colleague, Professor Lup Bonerup. And these are students who involved one way or another in some of the the works. Some of it overlaps with what I'm going to show you today. And these are just illustrations of some of the different systems which other people and which we also have have looked at over the years. Uh these each of these represent a little magnet. But before I explain all of that, let me give you a little bit of an outline. Um this is a just an inspiration. It's a wonderful beautiful picture of a fly larvae. And you can see all the neurons here are are close packed and they expand out as as the the fly uh as it grows into a fly. But the efficiency and the minimal amount of of connections and yet what the fly can do is is really quite amazing. And that's a little bit of what trying to discover in all of this. So for the first thing first thing I'll start with is a little bit introduction to what I mean by magnetism and nanomagnets and why I think this might be a possible platform at least for some key aspects of what I think is called predictive coding and then I'll give some examples active inference and tracking and some other examples as well and then finally when I talked about these real systems and more sophisticated models to demonstrate uh material specific properties then I have some micromagnetic examples that's what they call it so let me start with a quick overview of magnetism and nanomagnets and some key definitions so I apologize if you've seen all of this before if it uh but uh it just gives us a way of defining terms uh in a in a common way so what is a nanomagnet Well, just means it's a little piece of magnetic material. This is a real picture. Uh the particles themselves are smaller than a micrometer. They're maybe 100 200 nanometers in length and half that size in width. And an example material would be an iron nickel compound. And the shape is what matters here. The shape is such that they tend to align as all the magnetization pointing in one direction or the other direction but always along this axis that minimizes the energy of the the the magnetic atoms. Uh so at lower temperatures then they form this magnetization and it tends to align along an axis. So it can be fairly well controlled just by the shape and the lithography is has has been developing steadily over the last 20 years. So one can even make smaller well- definfined particles. Now the nice thing about it by being able to make many of these particles and place them in close proximity to one another is that these little magnets interact with one another just by stray magnetic fields. It's the same sort of magnetic fields that holds a magnet to a a refrigerator door. Uh but what it does then is depending on which way the magnet in the magnetic particle is oriented, it always likes to be north south. So if I draw little arrows to represent which direction the magnetization the particle is, they always try to order in a way that uh minimizes the stray field energy uh which is represented by these little bar magnets I've drawn schematically over here. And so to be north south like that means that they if they're placing in this direction they like to be antiparallel that minimizes their energy. Whereas if you place them at a corner like this then they'll form a corner and try to make a chain. uh the point is there is an energy associated with their interaction. They can adjust their orientation to minimize that energy and that's sort of the basis starting point for where I think this overlaps with uh the act the predictive coding algorithm. Um so the shape just means they have arrows along one direction and you can place them close together and then they behave like little toy magnets. Now the freedom and flexibility of the lithography which has developed over the years is you can place them in all sorts of interesting geometries where these interactions can compete. And the name of that field is artificial spin ice and it is motivated by uh a residual entropy that was predicted by poly for water ice. the way that the um uh polarization the the distribution between plus and minus charges would order just in regular water ice. It is frustrated. It competes. It cannot find its minimum minimum energy. And one can engineer that and study the frustration by putting these particles in certain arrangements. So this arrangement uh is one where there's a two-fold degenerate ground state and it forms net anti-feromagnet meaning there's a cancellation of all the magnetic moments. This one where you just rotate everything a little bit prefers a ferroagnetic orientation. So there's a net magnetic moment. Others which can be engineered uh are are not really in either of these classes. They they are instead what they're called topological ordering. So I'm going to talk about primarily this ferromagnet one just to illustrate the key ideas here. Before I do that, uh, as I was telling you before my interest in this area, I I was thinking that someday people are going to develop these magnetic arrays once I have the technology uh, for neuromorphic application. And indeed that has been seen in the last 5 years where there are primarily reservoir computing algorithms have been implemented and one of the motivations in fact the prime motivation for this is the power efficiency. So if we think about a conventional semiconductor-based logic, a computer, the information is moved around by charge currents and charge currents lose energy through dual heating through resistance. So all the heat that's generated by the CPU uh is just wasted energy from moving charges around. Uh information in a magnetic system can be encoded in the direction of little arrows I just talked about. The energy involved in reversing these little arrows can be in fact as as as small as is allowed thermodynamically in principle. It's called the land hour limit. And this is not just a factor of two or three more efficient. It is orders of magnitude more efficient than uh what can be done by moving charges around. So that is one of the prime motivations for trying to implement some of the very computationally heavy activities associated with uh machine learning. Um and that's motivated this field. There's some other things too. You you can start thinking about modifying individual elements and states next uh horizon is actually being able to do this in three dimensions and people are making strides toward that. So it's an interesting area and it has the promise or at least the potential of uh introducing a non semiconductor and conventional platform which is particularly power efficient for conventional and non-conventional computing. to make use of all that there's some basic concepts. So I'll begin with this design here of a spin system. Now it prefers to align at in its lowest energy configuration such that there is if you add up the little arrows there will be a net magnetic moment meaning there'll be a net number of arrows which don't cancel out. These cancel out in that direction but this group of four those add. And there's four different ways to do that. It could be these two adding and these cancelling. And what we care about is the average direction of the arrow which is the average magnetization. So I define a magnetization then as an average and it will be a thermal average and where these little sigas represent the individual spins making up the magnetization. And this can be averaged over the entire material. And so if you do that, you would measure then the average magnetization the way these superimpose with one another. So that you have a magnetization curve which would look uh as a function of temperature. Uh they all for a ferroagnet like to lie in the same direction or nearly lie as you increase temperature. But at some critical temperature uh spins will start reversing and point in another direction and that reduces the magnetization. And the rate at which this happens we call a susceptibility and statistically that's actually a correlation function. Those two things are important because those are the two things which I will try to uh convince you overlap directly into a predictive coding scheme and just enable it. then the magnetization to act as a platform for implementing this sort of thing. So the next bit that's important is to recognize how the magnetization evolves over time the processes involved. So if I consider a whole lot of these little magnets, whatever geometry it is in, I can adjust the orientation with a magnetic field which I might apply externally. So I might generate a magnetic field either through another magnet or a coil or something like that and apply it to this array and that if it's strong enough it will tend to align all the magnetizations as much as they can uh in the direction of that field. Now if I reduce that field and I have a finite temperature there'll be a reduction in the number of uh spins or elements which like to point in their original direction and some of them will start to favor alignment with the field in its new direction and so there might be a region which is pointed oppositely the others. So you see there's a net reduction in the magnetization. And as I increase the magnetic field in this new direction, this region grows at the expense of the other region until when I get to a large enough field, everything is pointing in the opposite direction. Um the point I want to make here is this is all happening in time and it can be observed in real time. So here's an example of an experiment that was done on on such a system where they start the magnetization in one direction, then apply a small field to give it another direction and then watch what happens as it evolves. And so microscopically what happens is all the spins were oriented one way and then one starts to reverse that causes or makes it more probable that another spin nearby will reverse which makes it more probable that yet another spin will reverse until they all reverse. This all happens in real time and there's a statistical probability of each of these reversals. So that time that it occurs in always changes a little bit but it is a stochastic process and each reversal is sampling the configuration space but it's always looking for a way to minimize its energy. So it's always trying to relax into a lowest energy configuration. So that sets me now to where I can talk about the overlap with predictive coding. Um, everybody here I think knows much more about this than I. Uh, I've been struggling to understand the logic behind it, but I think I've got a a better idea now. Um, if we think about two variables associated, well, I I think of it this way. If I'm looking at the visual system, which I'm a little bit more familiar with, and I I throw an object in the air, my eyes are following it. Uh, but they're they're doing it in a semi-random way. Okay, there's psychic eye motion and they're there tend to to where am I going to look in the next instant is going to depend on what I've perceived in the previous instance. And so there's a lot of information there. There's velocity, position, all of that. But I'm going to to look in an area where it's probably more probable to find the object in the next instant. So there's two things going on. I have a perception and I have some expectation or belief of where it's and what I'm interested in or what my neurons are interested in is a probability distribution relating these two quantities now and and that's where the the whole theory begins. So I've got some sort of input data and I've got some sort of belief state of my neurons and I'm going to say there's some sort of mapping and it it's not a perfect one to one. It's it's stochastic. there's a certain randomness uh on on both both sides of this and I'll say that that non there's a nonlinear function mapping it or it can be nonlinear uh mapping uh say my perception to a belief with bit of random noise as well or maybe my next belief the transition to my next belief is also going to be a nonlinear mapping or linear it can be linearized as well but it's some sort of mapping some function I don't necessarily know what that function is and moreover this can be in a hierarchical system. So like the the original Ral Ballard paper where a lot of this uh was was uh described in terms of vision is a layered system uh where there's an image input from the the back of the eye and then that feeds forward into regions of the brain. there feed forward uh differences between the expectation what was perceived and then a prediction of which way maybe the eye ought to move next uh or it would involve that and you keep going up the ladder and back and forth. But I think that the main idea is that each layer tries to minimize locally uh its error function and match up the predictions with the perceptions at each layer. And so this this is a little bit different I think than a lot of of uh global oriented machine learning algorithms that are maybe a bit more uh uh familiar with. Um, one other thing too when I gave my example about tracking an object, there's a lot of information being gathered in each time interval and that includes position, but it also includes velocity and accelerations can in principle be any order of dynamics. And so in addition to having a hierarchical uh u layering uh one can also envision a kind of a lateral hierarchy if you want. And so I call that dynamic ordering. And that that is I think the idea that that Friston uh introduced uh back in the in the the late two around 2008 and so on. And what the idea that evolves from all of that is I now have new indices that complicate my my states and my perceptions. They're indexed by by layer and by dynamic order. But the time evolution of my beliefs then with this dynamic information also introduce a term over here. But they're governed primarily uh by this uh relaxation of some energy function. And that tends to to to uh uh that's the free energy idea that you're trying to to find an extreal value. And it's this gradient which is most interesting for me uh for for what guides this because that's where I can map that onto the magnetic system most easily. And I put a little note here that this is a langean type equation but it can be also derived in in the physics context where most physicists would be familiar with the fauler plank equation for the distribution the time evolution of a joint distribution function and these equations emerge naturally from that. Um here's how we do it with predictive coding then in magnetization. So, I've got my my state variables. Uh, you might call them the hidden states and the more visible states. They're indexed by layer in the hierarchy, but also by dynamic order. And I'm going to say that I'm going to translate this statement of a a nonlinear mapping between the visible and hidden states through these G and F functions. I'm going to translate them into measurements on a magnetic system. And the magnetic system uh is uh a magnetization something which responds where I put a field on it. That field is a function of these variables these state variables and the magnetization is what responds or how the system responds to that magnetization. As I said earlier, system is always trying to find a way to minimize its mechanical energy and its entropy, maximize its entropy uh subject to whatever that constraining field is. So if I can sample that, that's why I put these angular brackets. It's a stochastic sampling. uh then I get a measure of the system trying to relax as it it must uh to uh a more energetically favorable configuration and I just in interpret that relaxation as an instantaneous value of the visible and hidden states. So this is all done at some finite temperature T. And the trick then is to figure out what this field is and then make a measurement of the magnetization. And so my lang equation then with this gradient of this error term or energy translates into a transition rate for my state variables here. the belief uh subject to this term which is effectively a force guiding the magnetization toward a lower energy state. So the terms that appear just for some details in how the mapping occurs the field which is the all important thing that's acting on the magnetization is a gradient of some energy function and that energy function is the lowest order expression for that is the difference between this nonlinear mapping and the average of my state whether I'm at whatever layer I'm in and at whatever order I'm in. And that defines my effective field. The terms which appear then there's a some parameter a precision uh which in my magnetic system goes like an inverse temperature and magnetization which is my f function and the derivative of that f function which is my susceptibility. So all these two things I can get from a measurement. uh I do it computationally but they be can be done through measurements. Uh we do that for data recording for example magnetic data recording all the time and this is the quantity then that tells me how my state variables will evolve in time. So the algorithm is really actually quite simple. At each time step, I sample my magnetization on some magnetic array where I've subjected it to a field which is a function of whatever the previous values for the state variables were. Then having measured that magnetization, I get new values for my state variables and I calculate fields and I repeat the process. So it's nothing more than that. It's the same thing we used to do with magnetic recording. Still do do with magnetic recording. You have information on a magnetic material. Uh you read it, but you can also write it. You just repeat it. So it's it's really quite simple and it's an old fairly wellestablished technology. What's different is doing it on uh sort of micrometer size patterns. Well, that's not different either. Um, here's an example. So, here's a three layer network with three dynamic nodes who would correspond to three different magnetic arrays. And I would apply a field separately to each one of these arrays in my updates. And then I just make a measurement of the magnetization from each of these nine arrays, feed it back in to get nine more fields, and just keep iterating. That's my implementation of the longitude equations that govern the uh predictive coding and that's how it works. Um it really is kind of simple. Here's an example. So I've done one uh which is fairly recent actually. Uh it it's not dynamic. It's just the layering. I modeled it on the RA Ballard paper. So it's but it's it's a simple one-dimensional version. So I I have uh an image with one dimension. It's just a sinosoid. So I got a feature in it. Um then I uh and I and I don't have very many nodes. I think this was like 30 or something like that. And then I uh reduce it to my first active layer uh mu1 which uh I think had something like 18 nodes. And then I reduce it down to six nodes in mu2. and a bit more feature extraction with mu3. And then for mu3 uh I can do a reconstruction. Now over here mu1 and mu3 don't look very good. That's because I'm doing it at high temperature. My original image looks like that and the reconstruction looks like that. When I lower the temperature because remember you know I get a critical point where the magnetization disappears. When I lower the temperature well quite a different picture. Here's my input data. Here's my first layer. It's learned it pretty well. Uh here's the second layer which is extracting some features learned from this and more refinement at this layer. Then I reconstruct from this layer the full image and it matches pretty well. But that's at low temperature. So this just illustrates I think where the magnetic uh system you you can actually see what it it is actually doing something. uh and it's through this nonlinear function. Another example uh this is now one which includes the dynamics. So it's a tracking example and I was inspired there was a a thesis written by uh millillage I think it is it's quite nice thesis uh and uh in his chapter 3 he did something like this I thought that was quite nice so I implemented it here and uh this is a sinosoid and I I give into it because I've got three dynamic orders as well as three hierarchical orders so I have a velocity and acceleration and an acceleration the acceleration um and that input data then is represented here with my fi and then this is the layer one um and it following the sinosoid quite nicely this is the layer two uh which is using a visible layer from here I'm by the way I'm I'm following a paper the formalism I'm using is is uh by buckley uh So have that hierarchy that they've used. So this is their visible and their hidden notation. These are errors on that and it's following quite nicely. So then was curious how this what's being learned if anything. So I tried a non-periodic input. Um so I would just uh at each position choose randomly a velocity. So sometimes go up or down. It's a one-dimensional example. And you see it does pretty well following even that random force choices in velocity. So I ran it for some time and then I turned off the signal. So I turned off my input here. And as you can see the hidden states however they keep going on. Looks like they they learned a trajectory from the most recent steps. Uh and so it is appears that they it did learn to predict which way the system was going to go. And yet you can see here it makes very quick corrections. But here there's no input data and it will eventually come back down to that. Um and this is going a lot of stuff is being filtered at the higher lay layers. They respond a bit more quickly than the lowest layer. And that's all consistent too with uh the observations that different time scales are happening at different hierarchical layers. um active inference which I haven't done yet but it's here uh this is this example so it's what I showed you on the very first slide nanomagnet control feedback to a process and then information coming back to the nanomagnets and again this is just repeating what was done in the Buckley paper uh the active inference part is this a so we have the we've associated then some change in the process uh which appears then as a new function in this e function and this appears in the in the in the perception part. So I look at how that is changing and adjust whatever this a signal is based on what is believed by the nanomagnets and the target here is a linearized f function but I'm still using uh an average over that linear f function uh of a of from my simulating it with my thermal magnets. So introduced into that function is a target value TD. And what that means is the system is going to try and align its perceptions through A with its belief that it ought to be at a temperature TD. And this function uh that is going on in the process is unknown to the system. Uh so it has to it can't know the function. and it just has to adjust uh its position with mu in such a way as to get the data coming back into the nanomagnet to give it a value of TD. So this target here is the green line and here is the measurement is the orange and the belief is the blue and you see it starts off over here far away from the target and then it oscillates and exponentially decays down uh until it hits the target. And this is the other bit of information that's coming in. That's that's the temperature. This is the rate of bit change of the temperature with respect to to whatever this this value uh x is that it's sending to a and uh so it's got these two bits of input which is just the position and and the velocity whoops went backwards and then this is the error function and I found it actually useful to see this as a trajectory so that if I look at the belief in blue which is really what my spins are doing and the perception that's coming back in uh which is my fi and they're starting off here and then the perception is slowly coming around and oscillating into its target value here and you see that the blue which is the stochastic magnets they're oscillating as well but doing quite a bit more jumping around but they also then find their center of gravity at the target point. Um this is just a note that rather than doing the simulation, I can actually uh capture most of what's going on here with a a simpler approximation which is is quite common in in magnetic systems. It's a brilluin function uh which allows me to introduce temperature and you see it gives me the same qualitative features uh that I had with the actual magnetic system. Um this is another thing which is that system below before was was just for three dynamical orders in one one layer one hierarchical layer. Um there are parameters which matter these precisions on two sets of terms which appear in my effective energy. Um I can get rid of the oscillations by adjusting these parameters. So what I did was I I basically built an active inference acting on the acting inference if you will. Uh so I built another network uh again with magnetic spins and uh their job however was to measure the free the energy uh the energy cost of the first layer which is interacting with the process over time. So they were running much slower and then try to minimize that energy by feeding back to these parameters uh the the lambda z and lambda omega and so this was the the first iteration it just got started but now I collected data and then uh there's feedback from this active inference acting on the acting inference which got a fewer oscillations and as I repeat this through this learning exercise you see it gets quite good near the end after about eight nine repeats and it just goes smoothly to the target. So, it's adjusted these parameters uh relative to the starting point to to take it exactly to the target without a lot of searching around. Um the last thing I'll mention is this. We're done with fairly simple models that is simple spins real magnets that people can make are not that simple. Although I did demonstrate you can use a fairly fairly straightforward mean field theory uh to get the the essential behaviors but that's a far cry from actually making a device. So there are tools for trying to simulate better more accurately more realistically magnetic nano particles. So I applied those tools and they can be done at finite temperature. It's just a different algorithm and it's called micromagnetics and I can put in parameters which are measured and known for materials iron nickel being one one of the compounds and various iso various variants of those compounds. But there are things that people can actually make lithographically into the kind of designs which I was showing. Um, so I chose one with 16 spins and and in this kind of a geometry. So it's a much simpler kind of system than than uh what I showing before. And I did this tracking exercise, but now call it a a PID controller. This is what it would look like electronically. Uh what I did was the same thing uh except it would be done with 16 spins and it did the same sort of targeting uh adjustment and oscillates around here where I'm now measuring directly uh the magnetization through my micromagnetic simulations and then adjusting those for applied field which then is feeding back into uh my imaginary thermostat over here. uh another application of the 16 spin system. If I uh say feed in an input function which is a sinosoid and a cosine uh for my two dynamical orders um I can move the system of my 16 spins such that from one initial condition to another which is specifi which I specify will correspond to an average magnetization. That average magnetization is nothing more than uh the average number of spins pointing to the right or up and down. Uh and I can pick then a set of states by picking my starting points and my final points. I can target a little subset of states uh where the magnets specific magnets are pointing in one direction or the other. So I can pick examples of this has a certain magnetization, this has a certain magnetization, this has a certain magnetization corresponding to the alignment of the spins. I can choose those states with some precision just by picking my initial and final conditions. Um the final one is just an example that uh what is a computationally hard problem in the field which is if you have a real nano particle some finite size with a lot of different kinds of more complex interactions uh how do you reverse it in a very very short time and this algorithm works rather nicely. uh reverses a magnetization from pointing up here to pointing down there by applying a pulseed shaped pulsed field in the right directions moving the field as well which is a really difficult problem. Uh you can't can't solve that very easily using any of the tools that people have at the moment and that's it. Um that's my my short summary. I think maybe nanomagnets and I think a broad class of systems probably um provide natural platforms for predictive coding by making this sort of mapping onto the magnetization or whatever the order parameter is and the susceptibility which are all temperature dependent. Um they're also stochastic processes. they are minimizing a physical degree energy and you can just map the two on to this apparently and constrain the system to evolve along a trajectory which we would recognize then in an active inference example. Um I'm also particularly interested in in systems which uh are complex and like uh glasses and spin glasses. Some of these display all sorts of various odd and not very well understood dynamics and I'm wondering about whether or not there's some avenues into those studies by employing this sort of a of a methodology if you will. Um that's it. thank you Robert that was awesome. Anyone watching live, please write any questions first. The Vladimir, please feel free to give any opening remarks and ask any questions you have first. &gt;&gt; Yeah, this is very interesting. Uh I just presentations and it I have several questions for for this. Uh so what your system what I see that it works and it can do calculations. what what you say predictive coding is mostly the doing computation with the m matter and in this uh system I think this there's a main uh part that it it is based on the mean field yes so that you you are using lerine equations and this is going to the you have a um free energy minimar and So they go to the minima and uh this system just learn uh the path and that's what you have this gradients towards the minimum and so this is the basis of the system the why it can be predictable and then how you can uh calculate &gt;&gt; yes this is correct &gt;&gt; yeah yeah that's exactly it that's why I think it's rather general can be taken outside of magnetic systems as Well, &gt;&gt; yeah. Yeah. So, this is quite general. So, you are at equilibrium. So, you have several uh local minimar and you can even make those changes within the minima. Yes. So, for example, if you have a system with several minimar and the kinetic barriers. So, that's can you also incorporate this? &gt;&gt; Well, that that's that's what I would like that's kind of what motivated all of it. as I I mentioned at the end about glasses which would be exactly that system &gt;&gt; and it's not yeah not not really at equilibrium and that that's what makes it interesting right because this evolution the longivan equation evolution especially with the dynamic orders is tracing a path through phase space and this is introducing constraints on that paths so I'm wondering ex that is what what I'd like to know is is does the landscape the energy landscape uh can is this a way of studying it? &gt;&gt; Uh what role does it play? &gt;&gt; Yeah. Yes. So that's uh basically if you have several local minimar and those switches it it may be quite interesting for computation. So if they are those kinetic barriers are too high then you are too stable. it will be not uh possible and and if it's too low it's also unstable for this kind of things. And uh uh another thing that would be also interesting to see how you can uh do for this non-equilibrium systems with which are not based on this relaxation of this but maybe going towards um non so I don't know if it's interesting to explore this direction it's completely non-equilibrium like we take glasses and jump. &gt;&gt; Yeah, that's exactly what I would like to to do. So far, I haven't I mean, one of the reasons I chose a spin ice as a model system is you you can engineer uh the landscape to some extent. &gt;&gt; yes, &gt;&gt; you can have multiple multiple energy states. And I have I've explored it numerically primarily uh trying to see the consequences. I found some oddities, some things are but I haven't haven't found I haven't made sense of it yet honestly. &gt;&gt; And have you tried it to this system is a a small uh size. So this is you can have a a very big number of of those particles or those spins and these big numbers may lead to some different uh scale so that you can do not only just explore at minimum but you can maybe use it as a on something completely different scale. So if you if you have access to such a big number of uh interacting particles so you have like like an avagadro system and may lead to some new phenomena &gt;&gt; I wonder that too I mean computationally right it starts to become very difficult um and uh we we're we're kind of moving in that direction trying to to be able to treat larger systems. Uh but it it is it starts to become very demanding &gt;&gt; uh for what to control it or &gt;&gt; uh to calc to simulate it &gt;&gt; over sufficiently long time scales. Yeah. &gt;&gt; But if you leave it to evolve by itself. So you because you want always like external control what you what it does. Yes. But if you just do it by itself just to self revolve. &gt;&gt; I said I'm not Yeah, I'm not sure I'm following. Uh how would you what would you look at? How would you set up that problem? &gt;&gt; Uh so for example, you may have you measure the properties for exampleization susceptibility of the whole system. So this is the &gt;&gt; but you don't provide the program what you what what it should calculate but it it systemic self organized into some states by itself uh let's see so for example I played around a little bit with this idea Um if I have I mean instead of a large system maybe I have many smaller systems which I run simultaneously on the same problem but I let each one follow its own path. And so for example, I think I was playing this when I showed you an example of the tracking where I'm um using a active inference to adjust my parameters to optimize parameters for the tracking. Um, if I have several systems simultaneously doing this and letting them adjust their own parameters, so to speak, then I have uh uh I think I was trying to think about which one of one of them is going to give me uh uh a state which is the one I want to feed back to my process because I can't feed back all of so I've got 2,000 different pro uh uh uh systems which are all trying to predict an outcome but only one of those is going to actually feed back to my process. Uh which one do I choose? So I I can make a create a probability of which one maybe the one that is closest that predicts closest to the target value has the highest probability. So I could choose which system to follow based on that probability. So I'm sort of sampling between all my my different uh uh uh systems. Is that sort of what you're thinking of in a way? &gt;&gt; But if you consider that interaction not calculation in a uh in a normal way that you provide a program or you design all and control external control but uh the material what you have interact with the uh environment and adjust the parameters. So without uh even writing this uh instructions I I'll ask a question from the live chat or I I I think I hear you on that Vladimir. I'm imagining one scenario where just stimuli are presented to a material and it could just be like sound vibrating sand and the sand pile never or maybe it's like an ultimate unsupervised learning but how much of this is the design for situation specific topologies like circuit design like and it's is it more like an ASIC And it's more restricted to a certain kind of inference or how how do you think about what functions it can perform? Or is it a general computer like a processor even if you could only do it very slowly? Like you play Game of Life, that kind of stuff. If it's just like a smaller hard drive with a spatialization element I maybe this is relevant I'm not sure there's this this thesis by millage um in this chapter he he did an image learning it was like learning u the emnest digits But he also had an interesting comment about uh hallucinating. If he gave it a partial or [Music] really a minimal amount of input, the system came back and filled in missing gaps in a a way which was a bit surprising. So, it was was like the system was was self-organizing into a response to something it couldn't categorize very well. I thought that was intriguing. I didn't really know what what that was saying, but it seemed interesting. Yeah, that that makes me think of a free energy minimum being possibly a local or global minima but still being very far off from like a some other some other measure. You know another one example which I I don't understand but I I I found very interesting. There were these papers few papers by by Fristen on uh a duet for one if I don't know if you know these papers with uh it was about bird song and I I think in one of them if I remember correctly yeah it was it was almost as if there was one system uh uh but then it was modeling it as if it were also two systems. So we have one which is singing and then it stops and the other one picked up the song uh and reproduced a lot of it. That that almost seems a little like that as well. It's kind of in that category. It's learned it. It's following it, but it's responding then because it it's it's it's up in this higher layers and comes back down. &gt;&gt; I'll ask a question from live chat. Burnt wrote, "I did not understand the step from the predictive processing feedback loop to active inference. Can you explain how to add in action? What are the affordances?" &gt;&gt; This one I think. Um so what I have in this case do I have all the equations? Um so there there are two streams of input to the nanomagnets. One is the temperature and one is the rate of change of the temperature. uh when you adjust a parameter and the parameter this x is essentially the the rate of change of the perception with respect to whatever value of a is in in terms of the magnets. So it's adjusting a in a way that is proportional to this turns out to be an error term uh on on uh the prediction and what is measured and then this coefficient just measures the the response essentially uh that this system is going to to react with. Uh so it's I've got a I've got a a single layer and then there's the system down here which is providing information. So it's a feed feed forward but then this is a feedback is what the A value is. So it's trying to minimize a discrepancy between the the belief and the perception by adjusting some parameter X and all it knows is it changes this parameter X and there's a response uh uh that leads to a new response from the process. So if it changes it it gets worse then it the signs on that term change and so it pushes it in the other direction. I don't know if that does that answer the question. So you mentioned the frustration and the study of frustration. So it's kind of like there's one alignment where it's a minimum a global or local minima which can be designed to be a or modeled as a convex optimization at least locally. And then that the system could be like the magnet is pointing north and the compass is aligned. And so then that's a static state or the magnetic field could be rotating or there could be other forces on the compass needle. And then the overall like tension or frustration is basically like the the relative malf. So that's the downhill tension reducing force. &gt;&gt; Mhm. that at least locally the the compass is going to reduce its the gradient is going to go one way or it's exactly at a flat point and then it just is static unless there's some other output and then to the physical part. So then maybe to end the bird's question about what the affordances are in the lab, what kinds of physical measurements and interventions can you do? &gt;&gt; Well, for the magnetic system, the kind of measurement you would do is measure the magnetization. Uh simple way to do that is uh if you've got a coil of wire and you move the magnet by it uh the field which passes through the wire induces a current and that can be measured. So that that that's sort of the basis. There's other ways to measure magnetization but that that's kind of a simple straightforward one. Is that that you mean the mechanics of measure of measuring the magnetic particles or is this a different question? Yeah. Just what do what do the measurements look like? Is it um is it and then what what can you can you make you change the fields with spatial and temporal precision just &gt;&gt; yeah those are there's different techniques and different technologies are even being developed as we speak but the maybe the simplest way to visualize them that they're typically some sort of variant of these kind of taper recorders which um here you've got a coil creates a field and that generates a particular magnetic order just like what you've just described or you have some way of maybe it's another coil or there's various devices which will are sensitive to magnetic fields and uh you move that device over a region of magnet and it measures that as well can done sometimes optically. For example, some of the I think I pointed out the neuromorphic that's the same problem in in these uh reservoir computing schemes. They actually use a combination of microwaves and uh there there's also scanning probe techniques to look locally and globally at at uh the configuration of the spins. So that there are there's a whole myriad of different different ways that depend very much on the system and the materials involved. Where do you see it being used? Is it like a research element or a data center piece or is it something that would be functional in a phone or something in a house? uh well if in one of the one of the ideas the motivation behind this is to try and find uh applications of materials that are much more efficient than transistors in cos technologies. there are different avenues you can pursue. One of them is just pure stochastic probabilistic generation because it it takes fair amount of resources to generate a random number or pseudo random number but you can do that with a magnetic system um quite readily and very good at that. Uh so people are also developing that as a technique and that's for also applications to probabilistic computing. Um and there may be many applications that that if you can make it portable enough you could do on your phone or um data centers for different machine learning algorithms for compression like image compression or I don't know about the I don't know that much about machine learning but I guess language models and transformers uh where uh it's I I do believe I read a white paper from the group uh where they were arguing that maybe active inference could also uh go and find application in those directions as well. So it's active inference as opposed to attention. Um but I think that's fairly recent. So I don't know if that's what direction or what exactly is meant by that. Vladimir, do you want to ask another &gt;&gt; No, I think it's was quite clear. This is I think it is a very interesting study and uh it in the materials it is not uh yet this direction is very new. I think it's not yet very how to calcute with matter. It's a quite new direction and that's one of the examples how it can be realized experimentally because in many discussions in the publication it there is a lot of theoretical concepts for example this active inference and other theoretical concepts how it should be done and how it can be realized but experimentally it very few uh examples which are really implemented and this is one of those examples. &gt;&gt; I think this is a strength. This is of this approach. This is a demonstration among the first. I think this &gt;&gt; Well, I I have a question for you also, Vladimir, if that's all right. I mean, &gt;&gt; yes. I I think you work with you I think I saw through some of your publications some work with nano particles and and do you work with uh materials that have some sort of polarization or something analogous to &gt;&gt; uh there was mostly inter field yes also it's a one of the direction that's also how to go to the equilibrium and in and how to minimize the free energy in general. So this is about for example for interaction with the membranes and biological systems there is also quite a big study. So this in goes in this direction and now what we're building the network for materials intelligent materials. &gt;&gt; Mhm. And uh here what's uh in one of the direction what we were trying to do is uh uh to build the discovery engine and also with Danielle it's in involved in this how to also for this field of materials how to find concepts for example how to make uh the materials intelligent and what are the uh phenomen monological concepts. So on a very uh high level so what do you need a memory you need uh uh computation you need uh what is the time scales although the system should change and what are short what is the short term what is the long term and this depends on the relaxation time so kind of this because it doesn't matter what is the system but you can already see if uh how It can behave because this as you see this is based on thermal energy minimization of the energy and there are very fundamental concepts which are driving driven them and the realization it's already can be captured from one system to another system and you can even map it for example and see this is you also your system of magnets what you see it's quite general the mechanism is quite general can be applied to another system. So this basically the idea of this uh um work is how to make those connections between different fields or different materials. &gt;&gt; And if you and the major problem there is that you don't have reliable experimental systems which are demonstrating it because there is a lot of theoretical concepts how it can be done. uh but uh you need to have this demonstrable fifiable results and this is I think this is how you show it. It can be used for another systems. This is kind of it can &gt;&gt; thanks I'll add like one kind of connection there that arising from your talk is how do we think about the aspects or the capacities or or reliability what to even measure how to have a a useful engineering and in silicico and in material flexible so that you can study different approximations and more um fieldlike models and more pointlike models so that you can do normal statistics on it and kind of port or have a good assembly language type connection kind of between like pro like like the analogy between processor instructions and that digital compute. So then it's like well what is the approach to map different materials and systems to their functions and then that's where these cognitive ontologies like precision, attention, belief, updating learning, all of those kinds of of cognitive onlogical terms become mappable from materials where with with that sort of uh team and work it is interesting to to look at the method sections and look at the parameter spaces of where methods have or haven't been done like which grid sizes have been done. It's just a really highdimensional space but possibly could be navigated uh interestingly to understand where where there might be where is something like a material that emulates a given function. Where is that? Like what is the status of being able to make that and then understand that within a structured parameterized experimental space to prioritize different experiments and uh perform meta analysis to understand how like just all all these different pieces. So yeah, what if Yeah, just to add a little from what I've seen from that project and where this sort of talk takes me. &gt;&gt; H well, I think I would be very excited if someone would actually try to to test this in one form or another this idea. I I think yes, you could maybe I I chose magnets just because I'm familiar with them, but uh I mean other platforms might be easier technically to implement some example. I think the P controller is a nice one because it's close to an application. Uh it's used in an enormous number of things uh from industrial control to cruise control on your car for example. or just a thermostat for your home. I mean, some practical device demonstration might be motivational in a sense. Uh, magnets may not be the best way to do it. Maybe there are other systems where you could envision uh something analogous liquid crystals or uh something which has a has a non-trivial response in ordering and yet subject to to thermal processes. uh I'm I know that even even in u uh some convent the memory technology for example is something which over 10 or 15 years has developed slowly but it's in kind of in that direction a material platform uh where where you have have something which has a trans transition function which would play the role say of a like the f function for example uh people do look in that direction as well. And the economics is the motivator there is to try to find uh more power efficient uh replacements for what one does with transistors. But I mean in trying to find implications for something like predictive coding, you got lots of examples from nature. Um you can make devices that could do something similar. Is there a software toolkit or a a production possibility like how would we what what are what kind of modeling can others engage with from this work or or production of of these objects &gt;&gt; uh experimentally? Uh I'm not sure I follow that like are they synthesizable by &gt;&gt; yes &gt;&gt; you or how do they get synthesized or designed or what open source or technical documentation exists to design the insilicone models or or or to make them physically. Well, I mean mainlessly in my experience anyway if you have an idea and something to that could be measured is to convince someone who has the laboratory able to do it to invest a few years of their time and graduate students into making it happen. Um and so that that's a little bit what I tried to do with this paper is demonstrate that yeah there would be a possibility of making these things using existing technologies. uh it could be done and someone may try it. Um but that would be just one example out of I think a new big possibilities uh big pro possibility space great ideas of other systems which might be easier to realize but I think in this one that's one of the reasons I chose it for this we have laboratories here can make nano particles and they do study uh spin glasses so we may may be able to do something in that direction. Yeah, it's very fascinating. Connor Hines and others have worked on the spin glass system a little bit as well. And so finding that that that sort of a a isomorphism between a generative model which can be emulated with distributions and maybe on batch data that works that works fine but then being able to have those calculations which it's very small set of them possibly or or even just one like gradient minimization methods alone. and have aspects of that computation. Just like sometimes we amortize from the matrix to the neural network and then go one layer into basically offsourcing some of what appears to be the signal processing and action selection like features of systems and and have that based upon the materials properties and then then co-design. Well, then what symbolic aspects complement the materials properties that might handle what otherwise seems to be variance that needs to be soaked up by an algorithm within just like the big data processing framework. I think this the spin glass I think you you mentioned the paper on spin glasses and active inference was hints I think it was yeah that's that's an interesting one because one wonders is is there a way of approaching that sort of a problem from a different perspective uh which is less coming up with a device or an algorithm but it's just a way of thinking about things which I I do wonder about maybe maybe a direction to look would be in active systems which is uh I think becoming I mentioned this paper about bird flocking years and years ago but that that kept up uh and I think the modern name for this is active systems uh falls under that rubric probably where you think about um particles which have almost like an attached motor and then how do they what's the hydrodnamics of such a system but I do wonder then uh if this is this way of thinking way of modeling wouldn't be quite a natural approach in some aspects of that kind of a of a more complex system. Uh to the question for me though is how to use this analysis in a way which is illuminating. Um I'm not sure I know yet. I mean I did get some insight in the exercise here. I didn't mention it. I didn't talk about it. But um I found it useful to take these equations that govern this this uh p it's a set of um three longitudin coupled equations and if I look at it from uh physics point of view as a set of equations which are not stochastic but let's suppose we just take those differential equations and study their spectral response then uh if I by choosing my a function as simply as possible. One can show that the system of equations is oscilly with an exponential decay. And that's not very surprising. It's just an oscillating system that responds in a in a well- definfined way. What is surprising is that it it will go asmtoically toward the target whatever you set the target at. But when you introduce uh uh uh noise into the system, it finds it much more quickly. And that that helped me understand how these equations are working. It's it's it's they're not mysterious. U they're just a mechanical response, if you will. But it's introducing the noise which actually makes it work better and faster. uh that that surprised me. So that that was maybe an insight I can take uh to be looking at other systems which are relaxation dynamics uh which are non-trivial. Um the noise matters quite a lot the magnitude and how it's introduced that is interesting. Um so that that's a direction I wonder about and the same with your question Vladimir about a system that might have a rather complex landscape. I think that's interesting as well uh in terms of how that evolves on a longer time scale. &gt;&gt; yeah and this is also related for example if you you example with the noise uh uh the stability of those systems because uh it is possible to design theoretically some system but experimentally it will not be stable and this is the major problem that how to control it that it will not fall apart. This is a h that noise may destroy the this uh the the properties this and how do you u control it? &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; But you you showed that above a certain temperature the functions of noise or temperature variance of of one kind or another it's just there's the right amount. So that's conveniently framed as precision or cognitive attention. And then I think the biggest theoretical mapping is that there's no interpolation of a reward secondary function. You're able to directly have a physical analogy at least where the analytic form of the free energy functional in silicon can be designed to reflect what was already transferred from the physics or inspired from the thermo and the information. So the theory theory mapping to the materials like Vladimir pointed out is really an exciting edge that your work is pushing along. So it's awesome to see. Yeah, &gt;&gt; there is a a certain range of parameters when the system is behaving like it can compute and it it is stable and can behave but those parameters are not obvious how to find this window of all these parameters temperatures and uh all the distances and everything what you have uh these control parameters they should be in a narrow range that it has sense and this is very difficult to find &gt;&gt; and that kind of connects to the active inference for active inference that you talked about like intelligent selection of materials properties. So thank you again for the work and for sharing. hope that people are interested and learn more and you and your colleagues are welcome to to share more. &gt;&gt; Well, thank you very much. It was it was nice to to learn about the uh the work that you're doing and the discussion. So, &gt;&gt; thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you.