ActInf GuestStream 125.1 ~ From Charles Darwin’s “Root Brain” to Nikola Tesla’s “6G World Brain”...

> Source: YouTube
> Playlist: GuestStreams
> Duration: 1:20:03 | Uploaded: Unknown
> Transcript method: auto_caption

Hello, welcome everyone. It is active inference guest stream 125.1 on December 17th, 2025. And we are with a group of researchers who will each present in sequence presenting on from Charles Darwin's root brain to Nicola Tesla's 6G worldbrain and XAI native 6G networks. So Martin, Nika Osman, thank you all for joining and looking forward to your presentation to you Martin. Thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you Daniel. So thanks for having us. So this is uh a co-presentation of three uh speakers. I will go first followed by Nika and Osman. Uh just let me Okay. So I will draw the big picture. So the overarching goal is to realize an AGI standing for artificial general intelligence native 6G world brain. uh of course using active inference. Nika will elaborate on the super superiority of active inference compared to generative AI and finally Osman will uh show some ideas how to exploit active inference for realizing explainable AI. So the vision of a world brain goes back to Tesla Nicola Tesla who made this famous prophecy when wireless is fully applied the earth will be converted into a huge brain. This has been standing there for decades. The point is that with emerging 6G and beyond technologies we are now close to realizing his prophecy. uh enabling technologies such as joint sensing and communication give rise to distributed sensing environment which together um create this perception arcs this sensing arc uh similar to uh active inference there will be also a loop back an action arc and there is a lot of research currently going on I just uh mentioned two buzzwords it's about AI embodiment and agentic AI I. So there needs to be research to be done. But once this is done, you can see that this AI native telecom brain creates a gigantic action perception loop similar to active inference. This hi native telecom brain has been proposed in this in this sorry about this background noise. Uh in this paper you can find it on iTle Explorer. Uh these are leading 6G scientists. The interesting part is in this paper the term active inference is not mentioned once. Likewise uh Carl Fristen is not mentioned once. These are stellar researchers but completely unaware of active inference. Of course we follow a different approach. We apply active inference and couple it with a number of other strategies such as MIT's human AI strategy which in a nutshell simply ask this question. So what would happen if we replace AI neurons with people? Keep in mind we want to build a gigantic world brain and it's not only humans but also so-called hyper inelligent cybernetic organ or organisms will which will emerge from existing AI systems in the coming age of hyper intelligence. The good news is that these cybernetic organisms will not compete with us humans but live in a mutually beneficial symbiosis with us human beings and because they are so superior they will consider us humans as we now regard plants. This sounds like bad news, but actually it's an invitation for us to explore this so-called evolutionary continuum of human and this is the official term from ecologist more than human intelligence. An example is the so-called wood web. So this term woodwide web made some waves back in the 90s when it was published in nature. A more technical term is microisal networks. This is goes back to two two Greek terms uh risel that means roots and mico that means fungi. So these are two different species with which live in in symbiosis. Symbiosis comes in a number of different flavors. It can be negative such as parasitism but microisal networks realize a mutually beneficial mutilism type of symbiosis. So this symbiotic flora fungi mutilism forms a new research field in biology. It's highlighted down here. So it's all about decentralized exchange of information resources and exchanging reciprocal rewards to create a community and res resilience underground of all forests. And you have these roots underground and of course roots of different trees are separated. But there's a third layer, these so-called fungi that um connect these uh roots of different trees of different species in order to create um an ecosystem. This has been observed years ago by Charles Darwin and Charles Darwin coined the term root. So this is a very packed figure. I mention it only some some highlights. So remember our goal is to build a world brain. However, given that active inference is a biomimatic framework, we take inspiration from uh nature, more specifically root brain. So we start with root brain, try to understand it and then replicate it in the virtual worlds of the emerging metaverse. To do so, we have to develop lifelike cybernetic organisms which require the convergence of digital evolution and biology. Giving rise to these aforementioned lifelike cybernetic organisms. This is a generic term. An example of lielike cybernetic organisms are these cyber fungi. And their role is to symbiomic these fungal networks properties such as transfer of resources from areas of abundance to scarcity from larger plants to smaller plants. So you see it's just the opposite of competition. It's really collaboration and mutual support. And this is because of entropy. Entropy is the nature's hidden force driving life to equilibrium. In our work, we also include a certain twist which makes things more interesting. As you might know from thermodynamics, equ uh entropy must stay the same or increase. But we use generative AI to change the laws of physics by also reducing ent uh entropy. This is done by using uh generative AI. More specifically, we use generative AI to dynamically couple two types of life cycles. So on one hand, we have plant life cycles such as trees. On the other side, we have mushroom life cycles. So mushrooms are the fruing body of those underground fungi. So simply put, we we create cyber fungi which mimic fungi in order to hallucinate a certain type of um network structure. The technical term is scale-free networks with small world properties in order to connect different plants and their life cycles. Then these fungi might embody themselves into mushrooms and each mushroom has a separate life cycle. So you see here a plant produces spores. Uh it's pollen, excuse me, and mushrooms produce borus. The interesting part is now these are biological terms. What does it mean in human terminology? So pollen might be translated into social norms like cross-pollination. So we spread one pollen from one plant to another plant. This is like in human societies. We spread a social norm from person A to person B. And spores an human equivalent of biological spores might be teological tokens such as purpose-driven tokens widely used in blockchain networks. So generative AI there are different types of generative API. We opted for OpenAI's improved DDPM. This is open source. DTPM stands for dnoising diffusion probabilistic models and it comes in two um complimentary processes. So we have a forward process called diffusion. This forward process increases entropy. So it creates disorder and of course this backward processes reverses the u process by reducing uh entropy. So creating order out of disorder. This is illustrated for a specific use case of DTPM image generation. So this is the backward process. We start with this order with chaos technically speaking white noise and then we let the dnoising process unfold itself and like like magically out of thin air it hallucinates a realistic uh image which was not in the training data set. So this is really like like magic. The trick and the challenge was to adapt DDPM from an image generation context to our root brain context. So simply put, you have to understand how these fungi work, identify the processes and map these biological processes to DTPM's forward and backward process. So specifically the forward diffusion process of DTPM was used to biomimic the so-called branching process and exploratory tendency of fungi. Conversely, the backward denoising process of DTPM was used to biomimic another set of processes carried out by the root brain namely fusing and homing process. This was all generative AI so far and of course we can do the same using active inference. This is the graphical model of our active inference uh uh generative model. So you have a number of parameters those working in active inference recognize them. G is the uh expected free energy uh B is the transition matrix and this is the graphical model behind every box. Of course you have a number of equations and as you know at least those working on active inference a generative model is typically uh developed using this pom dp partially observable markup decision process. This is what we did and then we were interested in comparing generative AI to active inference. For this we had to define a use case. Our use case was a bunch of people, 64 people, humans, and one person starts performing a new behavior and we were interested how long it takes that until the new behavior is propagating through the entire population. So, we have two metrics. I will break it down on the following slides because this figure is a little bit too packed. Important is how to read the x-axis. You have to read it from left to right. This is the forward process of DTPM. And then vice versa from right to left. This is the secondary backward process of DTPM. Now I break it down. So we were interested in the first metric. It's just the number of time units it takes till a new behavior is propagated through the entire population. And the black are the blue solid lines. This is the forward process. So we start with a number of uh curves. This is dependent on a small parameter r. This is simply the spreading probability of the new behavior. So the probability that the new behavior jumps from person over to person B. And as you can see as the forward process is unfolding the number of required timers is dropping rapidly and then hits a plateau. It stays flat and then from red to left we enter the backward process. This is the dash red line and it's interesting what's happening at the end. You can see the red curve stays flat. It does not go back up as the initial curves. And this is very interesting because it it tells us that with a uh DTPM we achieve minimum number of time uh units it takes to propagate a certain behavior through population. And the second important observation is it's completely independent of the spreading probability. So it doesn't matter whether you are more a less willing to adapt a new behavior. generative AI is so powerful to keep the minimum uh at two time limits. Then a second metric was kind of how to incentivize people. You know, if you want you have a group of 64 people, you ask them please adapt this and that behavior. Of course, this behavior should be desirable. But you can also um encourage incentivize people. This is done by token. So whenever a couple of person people uh decide to adapt a new behavior, each person is rewarded with one token. Again, I keep it short here due to time limit. Uh the uh green curve is the forward process. These dash purple uh curves are the backward process. This bunch of curves uh curves hover over 2,500 tokens roughly. Keep this number in mind because we compared it to active inference. So it's a typical figure. It's like a cost function we have to invest to to uh incentivize behavior. The [snorts] cost function is around 2,500 tokens. Then we did the same use case bunch of 64 people with active inference. First metric the time it takes to achieve full social contagion. It's a little bit slower. Instead of two time units, it's one, but it's comparable. The main main difference is in the cost function. So instead of 200 2,500, we have only 250 tokens to spend. So active inference really outperforms generative AI by one order of magnitude by a factor of 10. Why is it? because active inference as opposed to generative AI is able of lifelong learning. This is illustrated here. On the y-axis we have the belief update magnitude and on the xaxis the uh active inference process unfolding. So let's start with dtpm the generated. This is the dashed yellowish curve. You see there's one learning event but then at the process is unfolding no more further learning is taking place very different from generative AI active inference there's a huge learning peak at the beginning and then there are is continuous learning throughout the process so one question we ask ourselves is whether there's a way to further enrich this lifelong learning process of active inference and this brought us to a new field. It's AI and psychedelic medicine. Believe it or not, this is a nent intersecting area of generative AI and psychedelics. Psychedelics is now part of mainstream medicine to cope with uh mental health issues such as depression and anxiety. [snorts] And the trick is of course we want to uh make AI not only a biomimeatics but also psychedelic mimatics meaning all the benefits of psychedelics are also realized in AI. Of course the question is how to do this. So the main challenge is how to integrate the cognitive mechanisms activated by psychedelics into our AI design. Doing this also has the nice benefit of addressing one of the shortcomings of active inference. As you might know, active inference is all about surprise minimization. This necessarily leads to this well-known problem of dark room problem. So if an active inference agent continuously performs active inference meaning surprising uh minimizing surprise the agent will sooner or later end up in a dark room because nothing is happening there. No surprise is happening there. Of course this is counter to what we expect from life. But instead of seeing it as a problem, we should see it as an invitation to close our eyes and turn our attention from the external action perception loop inward. Okay? And neuroscientists use this term brain dark energy. So whenever we close our eyes, our brain is not doing less, just the opposite. some parts of the brain really lit up and consume up to 20 times uh more energy when at rest and this is uh the path forward. So we have to extend expand active inference by a secondary complimentary uh theory. It's known as entropic brain theory. Of course KL Frisen already worked on this. So psychedelics have two benefits. It not only widens the free energy landscape but it also flattens the minima so it's easier to escape a local minima order to explore the widened uh free energy landscape. So I'm almost done and then I hand it over to NA. So in our work and we can report some results on this. Our aim first aim was to advance active inference from a biological aging context to a psychoactive agent. Uh luckily nature produces psychoactive agents which come in three flavors. Stimulants such as caffeine, seditive if you undergo a surgery you use sedatives such as opium and of course the third one hallogens such as psilocybin. And the interesting part is only this the third one produces this um characteristic this feature we are trying to harness mental plasticity. So only hloenogenic agents are capable of inducing the state of mental plasticity and this is what we want to mimic in our AI design. And to do so we had to go back to the generative model of active inference. Recall typically it uses the concept of pom dp. So it comes with a standard set of variables and matrices. None of them is suitable to accommodate psychedelics. So you have to explore the so-called pom dp pom dp extension and then you find something which captures the prior belief of agents D. And our goal is to induce mental plasticity. And to do so, we have to weaken uh the prior belief D of uh active inference agent. And this is done by decreasing a certain parameter known as precision parameter omega norm. And this is my final slide. So this is something just for illustration how EBT really kicks in. On the y-axis you have the entropy of prior belief. Okay. And on the x-axis again the active inference process unfolding. We compare two different active inference agents. The red one is a conventional active inference without any EBT enhancement and it does what it's supposed to do throughout the process. The agent tries to minimize uh surprise meaning minimizing entropy. And this is for survival. It's good purpose for learning. It's not the best strategy because minimizing surprise of course avoids surprise and epistemic opportunities. The second agent was put under psychedelic for a temporary window between time step 500 and time step uh 1,000. And then you can see the entropy of the second second um uh agents belief really shoots up and then it stays flat. This being flat also nicely um reflects this so-called psychedelic afterglow effect of psychedelics. This is good news because it shows that EBT is really able to increase entropy and increasing entropy in our terms means you know it enables divergent thinking and this is instrumental in in uh increasing creativity of our AI agents and 6G world brain. This is all from my side. Now I hand it over to Na. Thank you. Okay, I will now share my slides. Okay. So, hello everyone. My name is Nika. I will now go into the implementation details of both generative AI and active inference agents. Uh compare their difference and compare the performance through results and then explain how we actually modified it with sleep, rest and psychedelics to solve the dark room problem. Okay. Uh here we compare generative AI versus active inference. With generative AI we have disembodied passive AI but with active inference we have embodied active AI. Embodied means it has an actual action perception look that acts in the board. With generative AI we have no belief updating after initial training. But with active inference we have continuous bian belief updating. uh here outputs are created with generative AI without acting in the environment. But with active inference, actions are selected by uh inferring posterior over policies. With generative AI, we have pattern matching perception. It means that generative AI does not truly understand it inputs. It just um detects statistical patterns in the data and just matches the statistical patterns. But with active inference we have perception as inferences of latent causes. It means that active inference actually understanded um hidden causes behind everything that happens in the world. Here we get inspired by the microisal networks. So microisal networks has three features that we get inspired by branching fusing and intreating. With branching we have exploration. So fungal filaments extend into the soil which mimic outward growth as exploration and increasing entropy and fusing is kind of an exploitation. So connection fused to redistribute nutrients and restore order and resource consolidation and with entreating or embodiment fruing bodies emerge emerge to act in the world. So it bridges dialogical and biological um digital and biological agency. Here we created 1.3 million small word scale-free graph structures using network X in Python. So using network X we created these graphs. Small word means the network has tightly connected local groups and scaffree means that the network uh has a few highly connected hops and many smaller nodes. So we here we encode the symmetric binary tensors as zero and one. So we have 64 humans that u these humans are representing and as nodes and the social links are representing as edges. So here when we have an edge we put one when we don't have an edge we put zero and we feed this uh data set into um the DDPM so we get adjacency tensors at outputs but in output we also necessarily don't have the binary output so we have a two-stage binarization threshold which is 0.5 if it's above this threshold we put one it means humans are connected if it's under this threshold we put zero And here cyber fungi acts as an adaptive generative AI agent and we do dynamic edge wiring with teological tokens. So here we try to do a social contagion norm. So the sparing probability is between zero and one. So this is a general overview of the pomdb based graphical model of active inference. I will now break down the slides into detail. So the agent model components are state factors, control factors and observation modalities. So here state factors are SORM, SMB, SNEV and STOK. SNORM is better agent adopted the social norm and SMB is for meta beliefs. So is what I think my neighbor believes and SNET is the network structure which means presence or absence of edges and STOK is whether cyber fungi issued aological token. For control factors we have cyber fungi agency and human agency. With cyber fun agency we have unit and uto is reviring adding or pruning edges to accelerate contagion and you talk is token assignment to reward norm adopters with human agency. So humans attend to norm and metabelief because humans should decide whether to adopt or reject a norm and they should decide whether to select a neighbor to sample new evidence from and also observation modalities are the same. We have four categories and humans attend to norm and OM and cyber fungi attend to on net and auto. Here are the generative model parameters. So we have a likelihood tensor which map hidden states to observation probabilities. We have a transition matrix with show temporal evolution of beliefs and priors D and E. So D is initial beliefs over hidden states and E is initial beliefs over actions and there is a C which is the outcome preference vector u which is the goal vector that we have. Uh this slide summarizes the free energy principle as a unified framework. So pre free energy principle measures the difference between what the agent believes and what's true and each agent minimizes f to reduce surprise and select optimal action and expected free energy is about the future. So we try to anticipate the value of future outcomes under the policy P with this formula. A key challenge with active inference is that we have computational tractability because we have 64 humans. The size of transition or likelihood matrices is 2 ^ 64  2 ^ 64. How we solve this challenge? So we divide these 64 into each sub factors. So the these sub factors has either base + one or base. So then only we need 2 ^ b i  2 ^ of b i likelihood or transition matrices. Uh this slide compares ddpm with active inference. So with r equals to one it means spreading probability equals to one. We see that af time is 1. and DDPM time is 2.5 for social contagion of all nodes. So not only active inference has less needs less time to have the social contagion of all nodes but we have 10 times more token efficiency. So AF achieves order of magnitude lower token cost than DDPM. This slide looks at the small word index. So the small word index uh this is the formula and it shows the ratio of clustering and path length relative to a random network. A rule of thumb says if the sigma or a small word network is bigger than one we have a small word regime. Here if you look the DDPM agents small word um a small word index is much more higher than the AF agent. So DDPM preserves a small word structure better than AIF. Here's why. Because DDPM shortens the path length and also increases the clustering coefficient. Here is the belief dynamics. So delta KL is obtained with this formula and it measures how much an agent updates its belief from one step to the next. So it's kind of a kale divergence of QS and QS minus one. Here AIF has multiple recurring spikes uh spikes during um which are [clears throat] decreasing over time which shows genuine learning and DDPM only has a single early uh peak which drops to zero which shows the minimal learning here. So, professor Meyer completely explained why uh what is dark room problem. Now, I'm going to explain what is our resolution. So, the resolution is that it's not just the brain minimizing uh the surprise. It's the agent environment. So, it means that uh the resolution is that uh in stimulating environments, the best way to reduce long-term uncertainty is actually to explore. This is called the enlightened room view. And here we have the neural evidence which is the break brain's dark energy. So brain uses 60 to 80% energy at rest and the default mode network or the DMN is active in rest for simulation, recall and pres uh preparation and intrinsic brain activity is 20 times more than external stimulus response. So it highlights exploration uh exploration as a baseline. So we try to disengage from action perception loop through sleep, rest and psychedelics to allow exploration within internal space. Here is the first modification we do through sleep cycle which is the Bayia model reduction. Our core concept is that Beijian model reduction prunes redundant connections similar to the sleep cycle and in absence of new data complexity minimization becomes our first goal. Here we calculate delta f uh which is the free energy difference between two models. Here you can see a is the posterior cont concentration parameter from observed data and a till is the prior parameters of the full model. A prime is the edge removal candidate for model reduction and B quantifies the model evidence. So we calculate delta F from here and if it is less than zero it is in favor of the reduced model. There are two stage for sleep routine. Stage one is resetting priors for each hidden state factors. So we override prior DF to posterior QF and this naturally removes the kale divergence term between QF and DF. The second stage is pruning edges. So for each edge uv we construct the reduced model and compute the delta f. If this is less than -3, it means that we prune the edge. This was the original BMR. So we have we propose an enhanced BMR cycle which has repeating cycles of wake, wake and sleep. This is a loop which shows continuous adaptation. In during each wake we add three edges and during each sleep we remove the weakest 20% of posterior QET edges. Here are the results of the Beijian model reduction and confidence dynamics. So here you can see that we have the single cycle BMR that f reduces from 10 to 9.75 which delta if is 0.25 nets. Here is the multicycle with guided pruning. So it is our proposed BMR. You can see that it goes from 10.5 to 9.25 here. So it reduces by 1.25. So it has a five times larger reduction in free energy. The next metric is confidence dynamics. So confidence uh is showing for example high confidence is clear agent rule. Confidence is obtained from negative entropy [clears throat] of QET. So and lower confidence is showing a structural uncertainty or uniform Q. Here you can see that the multicycle agent has higher confidence than the wake only agent. The second modification we do is through rest. So during rest, the brain exhibits a spontaneous activity across resting state networks and RSM maximize uh special templar entropy reflecting the brain's generative model for future adaptability and accuracy is deemphasized here. So we want to map rest fases to PMDP based AF framework. We have five stages. First we disengage from external inputs. Then we suppress accuracy and try to do maximum entropy policy sampling. So we try to build the fictive trajectories and sample from categorical priors and categorical transition matrices. And using these frictive trajectories we try to update the dural parameters A and B. Here are the results. We builded spatial a special spatial entropy temporal entropy and a spatial temporal entropy. Here a spatial entropy measures the diversity of network clustering. So here you can see that weight plus stress agent has more spatial entropy. It means that it has more distributed and flexible connectivity. With temporal entropy we uh we capture irregularity of norm. And here you see that there is uh a little or no difference between them which higher um temporal entropy indicates more asynchronous norm switching between agents and spatial temporal entropy capture both spatial and temporal entropy features. So you can see it's with wake plus rest agent we have a little more special temporal entropy and because we suppressed accuracy in the wake plus rest agent you see that accuracy here is less than the accuracy in wake only accuracy shows the negative expected surprise and it's the predictive alignment between beliefs and observations. The third modification we do is brain theory unification under psychedelics. So, Professor Fson's work merges free energy principle with entropic brain theory which links computational neurobiological and experimental insight into a single explanatory model. Here we uh try to do precision relaxation. So using psychedelics we relax the precision of highle priors. This fosters openness and cognitive flexibility. Then we uh then this increases entropy. So psychedelics temporarily increase brain entropy which allows escape from uh repetitive patterns of thoughts and promoting novel neural trajectory. And then we have expanded accessibility. So this expand the brain's accessible state. uh so it allows the emergence of uh new cognitive configurations. Here we uh deactivate the default mode network. The default mode network or DMN is the part of the brain responsible for self-referential thinking and rigid patterns of thought. And then we have the psychedelic afterlow which is the period uh after psychedelic effect wears off. So the brain settles into a state that is stable but more flexible than before. Here are the results of cognitive dynamics under psychedelics which shows the prior entropy. Here you have uh the prior entropy results. The prior entropy measures the uncertainty of priors. Here you can see that with psychedelics and through psychedelic window we are we have more prior entropy which means we have flexible priors and it also stays the same after the psychedelic window which means uh we have the psychedelic after glow effect. Next we try to second we try to um show the posterior synchrony. uh so we measure posterior synchrony or belief coherence which captures how aligned agent beliefs are across the networks. So here high synchrony means that we have coherent beliefs. So with wake only agent we have coherent beliefs but with wake plus uh with um psychedelic agent we don't have coherent beliefs. So it's it's trying to enhance the exploration instead of coherent beliefs. Our final use case is the comparison of AF enhancements. So we compare all the prior entropies of all agents with sleep, rest, psychedelics. You can see that sleep has most prior entropy and wake has the least prior entropy. Okay, here Osmo will take over and explain about active inference and explain explainable AI. Thank you. Thank you, Nico. Let me share my uh slid set. Oops. So, you can see I guess right now. Yeah. Okay. So, uh first of all, welcome everyone. I'm Mosmanai on the behalf of Technical University of Berlin and Fran Homefare HHI Institute. But uh we were collaborating with INR especially of course professor Meyer last one year over and I was visiting um him this uh summer this summer uh in the Canada. So that's I will try to do um basically come up with the um how we can combine active inference in the in the in the sense of u next generation wireless networks. Specifically, I will uh after this theoretical size of the research, I will come up with the more application domain for the next generation wireless as I said 6GN 6G beyond uh architecture and my like my research focus was explainable AI and AI I'm an AI scientist for wireless. So I will try to combine these two methodology in a way that with our recent research. So let's start with the uh our uh very foundational information age um um um terms and the paradigms which is the uh maybe in in your community it's not maybe very familiar but like cloud Shannon was the like define the nowadays that we are knowing what is the communication network so how the one two asset can communicate in a way that information source to destination source how the message goes basically the How today whatever you know about the wireless or telephone technology is comes comes up with this diagram the basically the we call it this information age that was the end of 40s early 50s this this design was happen uh but um while he was uh designing information age he was also of course interested on the learning machines thinking machines as like Ellen Turing but of while he was doing this specifically as our today's um talks the the title Darwin's root brain theory he was also aware that Darin was also um coming up for the like this uh bio biology inspired machine so cloud Shannon was also was the aware of it while designing this wireless um communication backbone he was also working on the learning learnable or like machine machine technologies or like logical machines so this isant important why because like last Ner IPS conference I was talking with the Mikail Wand Shar from University Cambridge. So the idea behind this wireless community and the AI community needs to work back to back to design efficiently of this the the upcoming uh technologies because nowadays 62% of the worldwide internet is used by mobile networks while this AI interaction happening. So that's very important actually the statistic when we thinking about it. Okay. After the very theoretical introduction then when we check about like we call it nowadays what is happening on the communication is we call this this this um period is um post Shannon era. Post channel era basically what is as you can previously the first slide you can remember that what we are like trying to send the throw bits towards uh transmitter to receiver. uh it's classical like channel channel is our the you know the uh the place that where we send the over the our uh message so but you can see that post channel row is a bit different because now we are started to train our AI models especially the artificial general intelligence models like foundation models to make more efficient coding um network coding on the like physical layer or if we go I will of course come up with new slides and regarding our uh research it's even for the upper layers like the semantic knowledge. So rather than to sending only row bits like you know the data or it can be voice it can be whatever the image now we can basically tell the network that what is our intent what we want to send it to receiver so that's to nowadays we call it post channel and error that's why the AI is heavily integrated on the 5G then we are trying to make basically the AI native 6G so that was the reason and you can see from here as I said AI already on the 5G is deployed so many uh different countries different factory settings or self-driving cars anywhere because when we thinking about today's like Vimo in the like San Francisco these cars needs to communicate with the edge servers over the wireless so they and when we thinking about use cases url means ultra reliable low latency communication or the EMBB like the video recording or video screening should be very like prioritized on the network this can prioritization or the resource allocation can done with the conventional AI techniques. But this is not enough because we are going further more sub 3 GHz activated bands which means more data rate and more capacity of the network. Then we can basically go more uh it's it's called advanced ultra reliable low latency communication. So this is coming towards near realtime interactions with the network towards the uh components of the real real life. So how it looks like I mean when we thinking about we're starting early age some of some of us maybe catch 3G some of us maybe 2G we realize it how it's changed basically you can see that what we are transferring was text to voice now we are talking about space communications tactile internet like the today's like like optimus robot hand um and interactions with the real time um uh life in the like or act of life and as as well as automated cars like um um like drones or digital tins they are the they are the now the the data sources or like the data um applications that we are using towards 6G. So that's very important and as you can see we are like 50 kilobit per second to one terabit uh terabyte per second communication we are talking and included quantum communication we call it like quantum aware communications in the in our domain. So this is a this is a big change basically it's not like from 2D to 3G. So we are basically designing the AI native uh AI native 6G. every layer of the protocol stack is communicating with different sort of um AI algorithms or let's call it learning learning um learning algorithms because some of them can be conventional uh you know machine learning techniques because you don't need the much more reasoning capacity or like cognitive inspired agents there but most of the time uh every layer it's this now we are designing to deploy 2030 to this technology with AI native so that's very it brings very important responsibility. That's why one of the very important pillars of this um AI native 6G design is secure and trustworthiness. So why this is very important? You can see this the ITU is international telecommunication union and 3GPP is the nowadays like any of generation of the technology like 2G, 3G, 4G, 5G is uh defined specification of the 3GPP which is included different companies, different institutes. they are like the biggest institutes in the world that they define the mobile or wireless networks uh specifications. So while they are doing this when they when you check their recent reports ITU R IMT uh like the 2030 report as well as the 3GPP is the last specification one of the biggest important uh pillars are trustworthiness trustworthiness means since we are designing AI native 6G we should aware that the there should there shouldn't be like a problem regarding trustworthiness expl or interoperable um decision points in the network uh while the network operating because there are so many um communication environments like energy grid networks like you can think about you know this the electricity problems happen in Portuguese or like this the uh nuclear centrals or like you can think about tele operations smart hospitals or very low latency applications on the smart factories is like a very high production lines so then this means that while okay we are doing this AI native design we should be aware that this AI doesn't degradate degragate the network performance. So that's why this trustworthiness or explanability aspect of design come to play. Now I want to show that okay we we talk about coming from the AI native design to explainable aspects and I want to come up with our uh in technical university of Berlin what we did some explainable AI research and then how we we can um get advantage of the active imperence in our use cases. One of the use case for instance remote controlled robot you can use this robot anywhere like it can be some earthquake situation it can be some exploration purposes anything else. So while you are using that you can maybe want to allocate your resource because there should be used in this scenario one one real um uh real uh robot remote control robot but you can use so many of them. So then you need to be aware of your network uh usage or network uh resource allocation problem. That's why you can use some uh prediction models on the top of your network. It's called that's why AI native and while this network communicating it can be oper uh you can your AI algorithm can operate some uh resource allocation problem for your components of your uh design. But again very important we are now talking about earthquake. there could be some lives or it we can talk about this robot can be basically working on the smart factory environment and making some operations. So then we should be aware again our prediction AI model or like learning model or like deep learning model or any reinforcement learning agent should be transparent and not blackbox. That's why the we designed in our AI algorithm top of it some XI design to make it transparently available. Any other any other story other story this was like a work with the northeastern university from uh US as well as India networks from Spain and NSF funed and we I mean one of the very biggest topic also in our communication or like any other when you check the companies digital events which means very low latency applications of the real world components to uh digital replica of it. Why? Then we can basically simulate so many different scenarios um of like that real life component. What could be production lines? What could be uh again like the smart medical applications? what could be robotic environments. Nowadays when we are talking about this humanoids uh their digital tables can be trained in a low cost and more efficient domains or even um I was at NIPS and there was a Tesla's presentation they are basically training their controller for the like this uh so-called digital t simulator. So that type of applications are very important. So you don't need to deploy the whole bench of network or technology stack. So that's why we made it in our um collaboration. We got the one of the collesium um uh digital tin to create a 6G network or 5G network in this sense here and then we basically created some different sparse datas with the generative AI. So the the main idea now we are working on that to make okay we are creating some synthetic data for the like digital t layer but is it really performance okay in a in a in a sense of AI KPIs it's it seems good but we should check that is the model is uh um operating in a good way that's why the XI was coming to play and and one other uh story was again in the molecular communication domain we in our projects called internet of bioano things. So this is also very important for the active inference people as well as the nikas and the professor meers side of the theory because now it's basically this AI models work for the biology um biology um environments. So we were basically what we did is we again when you think about the communication network it was immune cell was the um uh transmitter and tumor cell was the receiver because when the tumor cell comes towards the immune cell immune cell started to release some sort of um um biochemical um components. So that's why we try to use some AI algorithms like especially very simple uh uh feed neural network to understand that which there was a two feature one is the like the estim the distance and other one was the released amount of molecules so while we using this AI we want to make it which component is much more efficient in our this nanocale design because it's very important then we have a knowledge about okay this feature is more informative in the sense of cancer research. So that's why we use explanability in the sense of this research. Lately I said the in communication there there should be there are some research domains on the uh physical layer but as well as the our latest research with like big collaborative work we try to basically on the higher level of the network component semantically we want to transfer the knowledge. I don't want to get that much detail but in this work we try to basically get um reasoning capacity and then the human expert can communicate with basically the network components in a way that with LLM way like the GPT models foundation models so that was the reason that's why we call it reasoning model so whatever it happens in the lower layer like let's say physical layer parts of the network it gets it's generates some graph neural uh some graphs and we convert it to knowledge graphs basically with the human human interpretable statements then human can interact with the like network which is normally it's not the case in our today's conventional communication mobile network. So that was the novelty of this work. So uh when we thinking about this is like this is a big change I'd say that starting from Shannon to post Shannon this was the from Huawei's report and they also like in the glocom they presented efficiently they want to change the full like nowadays how we knowing the the communication networks they want to change it for the like full LLM GPT wise network for instance they called their user equipment which is our phones is uh for them um uh AI phone or or like they call it AI REN. So everything is work with the LLM uh integrated agentic vision. So which is a which is upcoming reality. So when we think about like it's again uh this this this movement towards agentic design for so many different applications as again professor my nikab was focusing on the uh in their talk like 3D networking blockchain technologies or holographic teleresence we should also like as we said as a wireless designer or like the 6G scientists we should come up with more um re um cognitively capable agents. So that's why the point of active inference was coming to play with our discussions with the professor meer and then we discussed like how we can do it and then my interest was more explanability and he he was on the like the more design of active inference for 6G. So we started of course with the state-of-the-art. So what is happening in our in our domain? What's uh what is like usage of the uh learning techniques? Most common technique in everywhere again reinforcement learning techniques for we call it network slicing. So the network compon network resources sliced between the prioritization of the scenario in the sense maybe um autonomous car very low latency communication some maybe smart hospital or maybe IoT sensors or maybe some ARVR glasses. So for them that's a efficient work for the like uh nowadays they use it in the wireless domain. So this is again traditional way and then we designed in our like well-known uh backbone of the um uh active inference agent we call it brain because this is the from the our paper's name based in reasoning where active inference for explainable mobile networks. Why we did it? The idea is again the same comes with the trustworthiness. You can use a reinforcement learning but you are not sure agents behavior. It can be a a degregated network performance but we can use the posterior beliefs here to represent the agents beliefs towards the upcoming decision action point regarding the states. That's why we come up with this design. I don't I don't want to get that much deep details because it's a very long paper and under the review of conference and the uh journal. So that's why I want to give up like what was the design in like a bit abstract way. So what we did is uh more than theory basically we applied uh active inference uh design brain agent to directly um um GPU accelerated radio access network which in the sense of different users three different users and then we try to basically visualize the agents beliefs with the help of this um posterior belief design of the active inference itself by nature. So this is inherently there. So that's why we want to use it in a way that how agent is seeing the network um network um state. So as you can see for instance in our three different slice scenario in in EMBB slice which is like this most like most connectivity like you can think about ARVR application here agents start with like he say that like regarding the first initial data prioritization in initialization he the agent or he she or it directly says that oh there's an high demand which is actually when when you think about it it's a it's it makes sense because the there is a demand end of the uh down link from the application domain. So that was makes sense and this was our checkpoints and in some some sort of after the uh the user equipment reached the network the agent itself it says that okay now it's getting more lower and this is like a as you can see this is the like belief probability the belief probability now the demand of the demand state or like the need of this resources for EMBB slice is lower and I mean same for the like different I mean different priority or different interest or different demand state for ultra reliable low latency but we were like efficiently see that agents behavior in a posterior belief state of course in the paper uh there is much more extreme and in restricted u agent uh behavior and then it's it's it's a it's a long paper so I will be happy to share uh when the results came so and lately again very fruitful result for us was the like when we check about the mean cumulative reward we because we want to in our scenario. We want to see the conventional reinforcement learning techniques su success and compare with this baselines and you can see that our uh the brain agent basically much more efficient in our non-stationary wireless environment than the well-known uh like you know actor critic or deep network or like policy gradient network is much more efficient than the average and because there some of them is gets sometimes the plateau and goes up and it's it's classical behaviors of reinforcement learning and then the uh the loss function was more efficiently stable in our scenario. And here I'm finalizing my talk. Thanks for listening for us. Now I think we can get some questions. Awesome. Okay. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Martin, comments from any of the other authors while I get everything back going. Yeah, we just were discussing among us while you were gone. I think our talk is kind of overwhelming nicely put or uh more I know it's to some and it might be even frightening you know not because the topic itself you know but it's just the ground we are covering you know we go from Charles Darvin from Nicola Tesla G application so it's just I think it's well nicely put there are many many things you could could ask question about on the other hand you know you might say so what is the major the the one takeaway you know you know so so Danny I feel for you you know I feel sorry you know &gt;&gt; yes I do have a few I guess entry points um &gt;&gt; especially for the the active inference people who will be familiar with some of the ways that the palm dps have been presented so I guess just to begin with in in the cyber fungal network? What cognitive functions does it perform and what kinds of transfer would you expect or how do you adapt it to other kinds of functionalities like the kinds of things that that we can use language models or other methods for today? So I would I would you know it's really you have to understand it's like a real brain you know so you have the different cognitive functions such as perception memory it's also a goal directed behavior you know so these fungal networks pursue a certain goal you know it's kind of to build a an ecosystem a community for exchanging not only information but also tangible nutrients you resources. So it's really it's everything active inference framework is in incorporating such as goal directed behavior, memory, action, perception is found in the in in the uh root brain. The interesting part for us is more kind of okay we we don't want to build a little AI or a little human brain. This fungal networks happens to be the largest living organism on planet earth. So our goal was to build uh a 6G world brain. So our motivation is then let's learn from the largest living organisms on planet earth which happened to be this fungal network. And we are not at the end of our question. So it's something it's so it's promising where to go next. I think it's it's really this what what is currently missing in 6G research this uh AI embodiment and agentic AI. So these fungal networks are underground in nature but you might remember I also said there are mushrooms. So mushrooms are the fruing bodies of fungi. So put differently the mushrooms help fungi to embody the space above ground. So mushrooms are like embodied fungi. So this is one type of so mimicking fungi for us gives some ideas how to realize AI embodiment and these mushrooms also engage in certain activities. So mimicking again mushrooms might give some some hints uh at realizing aentic AI. So this is from my side I I have to say for now. So the pom dp was able to select different edges and modify the network state. So the memory is encoded in the network topology and dynamics and what what um about the token encoding because you talked about the token efficacy of generative AI and active inference. So I was wondering whether those were observations or whether the tokens were embedded like they had already been passed through an embedding model of a LLM. So I hand it over to NA to give her the opportunity to and &gt;&gt; thank you. So uh here when we do when we do this with DDPM okay it's like uh some tokens when we have the so this is at each step okay for 4,000 diffusion step we are creating every DDPM graph structure so we have 64 humans as this connect together we have a link or not if they have a link okay if there is a link between two humans there is a token as a reward assigned to either of the humans. So one token to one human at the end of one link and one token to another human at the end of the other link. This happens the same exactly with the active inference. So here we can say actually the network that active inference creates has much more less edges than the network that DDPM creates. This is the meaning of token assignment. So it has much less edges but it has the the same efficiency. Why? Because the time it takes for social contagion of all norms is the same basically. And even for spreading probability which equals to one or 100% it means that um when some human has the social norm the other one that has a link to it 100% adopts the norm. So it means that with uh in this condition which r equals to one af time for social contagion of all nodes is even uh less than ddpm time. How how much less AI af takes one time unit and DDPM takes 2.5 time units. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Okay. So, the tokens are being they're kind of a it's like a currency within the simulation that's being passed amongst the agents. &gt;&gt; Okay. Yeah. &gt;&gt; So, and you're calling the nodes humans and were they people or just a simulated agent? No, there are agents active inference agents in active inference and um nodes in DDP. &gt;&gt; Okay. What was the teological token? &gt;&gt; Teological token is kind of a reward-based token. Okay. It's a purpose-driven token. So what is [clears throat] our purpose here is to uh as fast as we can we have to do the social contagion of all nodes. So all of the nodes in the network which is 64 humans have to adopt the norm. So we want to see how fast and how efficient is that and a token is like a cost for us. Okay. Why this is a cost? because we cannot have like as many as edges that we want. Okay. But with so much uh less edges, we can have the same level of efficiency in active inference. So like this is much better. &gt;&gt; Okay. So h how do you go from what that network does to the kinds of tasks that people are working on or the kinds of ways that people would want memory or perception and action to be working. &gt;&gt; Okay. So uh for for example perception and action we had agent model components. So we have some hidden state factors for active inference. And these hidden state factors then we have agency. So we have actions. So because active inference have to have a action perception loop. Yeah. So uh they have to act in the word. So what does cyber fungi do? It actually assigns tokens to each of them. So as I said it uh assigns tokens to each of the humans that has are at the end of the edges. So when there is a edge we have two tokens for each human. So cyber fungi does this and also does the reviring. So for example cyber fungi can remove one edge and add one another edge. How does uh the cyber fungi do this based on free energy principle. So there are candidates. For example, we want to add three edges. Okay, there are candidates. And then cyber fungi calculates the free energy. What happens if we add this edge? What happens to the free energy of the network? And it only if it um reduces the free energy, we can add that edge. If not, we don't add that edge. So the policy is uh move leading us toward uh reducing free energy which is the based on free energy principle by caron. Yeah. &gt;&gt; So how would it memorize or operate on like a text string? Right now there's one kind of token being passed around these different agents and then these network topological model selection driven operations. So would it stay with one kind of I'll let Martin back in. Would you expect it to stay with one kind of token or would there be multiple kinds of tokens to support memory? Uh with active inference we actually don't have memory because uh like this is randomly some candidates of edges are uh selected then we have the free energy. So we have to calculate the free energy and go whether this reduces the free energy over 4,000 steps. So because we have 4,000 steps it is done like as we want but with DDPM we have something like a memory because it it has the training data set. So it trains on 1.3 million networks small a small word scale free networks and at the end it's uh trying to create the same features the small word feature and the scale free features it creates it but like with much more token cost uh and also what was the other part of the question sorry &gt;&gt; whether you would sort of scale or develop this with one kind of internal network currency or multiple different types. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. We we can implement we can definitely implement different kind of tokens each of them meaning something. For example, we define tokens as whether there is a edge between two humans and we assign two tokens to each of them. But we can uh because this is a purpose-driven token, we can assign different tokens. So this this is based on us like we can extend and our work in this direction. Definitely. Yeah. And is that um just remind what paper and is that code available for that first part? &gt;&gt; Um the data set is available online but I haven't uploaded the code yet and we uh only submitted the paper and we are waiting for the result but I will upload the code soon. &gt;&gt; Cool. Um yeah, what what are the next moves? Like it there's definitely a lot of sides to the development of of your research, but what do you feel like your next moves are? &gt;&gt; Yeah. Uh because we uh we did some kind of embodiment here. So we did embodiment with DDPM because [clears throat] of some action that we did on it. But we we want to push this burden. We want to move forward with this embodiment. So as we said, we are trying to move from the fungal networks that are underground to mushrooms. Now we want to get to the above word. So mushrooms are the fruing bodies or embodiment of the fungal networks. So we want to move to some kind of 3D spatial internet which we want to implement it with the holographic content to helps us with the uh for example any use case that we want with the social contagion we can do it or we want to like have a real time 3D spatial internet we are currently working on that. Osman or Martin want to add any sort of closing comments? No, &gt;&gt; I I I want to I want to hint at uh to at Osman. I think this explanability because active inference is very very suitable for enabling explanable AI. Maybe Osman you can make some comments on &gt;&gt; of course of course Martin. Uh as as I said I mean I give a bit sneak peek of results. So what our I mean most of the uh um the focus was be nature of this posterior beliefs it's very important it's very informative side of this the uh the the theory of active inference as well as this the free energy minimization so in that sense we can get so many informative results in the scenario of non-stationary wireless data domains like as well as as I said radio access networks so that's at the moment our this two extended work is one on the conference and then the paper but uh there are also still so because it's very new in our domain I mean um we we can get of course we check now as I said the uh the agents stationational awareness but we can also check the action and the minimization of the free energy principle um and the the let's say interpretability then we can get it more information about the the agents behavior which is very informative in the sense of again uh very critical networks or low latency applications as again one of the low latency applications as the nika said is holographic communications or like let's say 3D internet in this type of settings when you want to use this type of AI agents it will be the like uh the one of the like need and constraint will be the trustworthiness so this will be our extended works towards different use case one another side I want to definitely want to explore is um the smart healthcare or like let's let's say like this type of applications because they are very vital so you need to be very uh reliable in this networks even if you are implementing some AI algorithms &gt;&gt; yeah definitely there's a lot of lot of work there with the explanability and the potion and semantic information transfer [clears throat] in a way is like explanability like &gt;&gt; distilling some world processes to their causal basis &gt;&gt; is the accounting just taking a higher resolution video is more syntactic information but it doesn't necessarily convey any further explainability. So when like you pointed out there's that cognitive agent to agent transfer just increasing the bandwidth alone doesn't capture or necessarily correlate with the semantics of the communication. So definitely a big emerging theme. And because there's going to be these different agents of different embodiment, you don't necessarily have one you template which is kind of the importance of having a unified cognitive approach whether the communication is to I guess a kitenbased or digital fungus as it were. Yeah, also lately I want slow like I didn't again like small addition about this explanability side of story you know also because of the our like interpretation of the free energy we can basically get again like if you want to like make it more interpretable a free energy minimization story in the like let's call it the agents behavior we also check in our the paper like this the so-called like preference or information gain So which is important because then we can also like understand what is the tendency of the agent that wants to do in this sense of scenario. So that was also the one of the our like let's say experiments in the paper. So I'm we call it exttrinsic and epistemic sort of uh exploitation. So that's why I mean I'm if the results are coming I'm happy to share and maybe the I was checking today to maybe coming to next active inference workshop and then to be uh in uh you know interact with the community about this works. Thank you. &gt;&gt; Cool. Yeah definitely I know many people will be interested to see the paper and the code when they arise. Um, any closing comments that either of you would like to make? &gt;&gt; Uh, thank you Daniel for hosting this meeting and thank you for your time and attention and your questions. We really appreciate this. &gt;&gt; Thank you so much for your time, Daniel. Nice to meet you again. &gt;&gt; Yes. So, good luck. Happy travels and looking forward to the next steps in the research. &gt;&gt; Okay, thank you. &gt;&gt; Bye. &gt;&gt; Have a good day.