ActInf GuestStream 109.1 ~ Hemming: "Free Energy, Attentional Narrowing, and Cognitive Rigidity"

> Source: YouTube
> Playlist: GuestStreams
> Duration: 1:21:32 | Uploaded: Unknown
> Transcript method: auto_caption

Hello, welcome everyone. Hi, it is Greetings. It's May 23rd, 2025 and we're in active inference guest stream 109.1 with Alexander Heming presenting some shared work on emotional attention and predictive processing. So, Alexander, thank you for joining. looking forward to your presentation and anyone watching live please feel free to write questions in the live chat during so thank you Alex too okay sweet so emotional attention and predictive processing um for the actual uh presentation I'll go through an introduction a foundations of attentional narrowing then a understanding of the neurology and a connection between the attentional narrowing and the predictive processing uh I'll run through some computational models so it'll give a more holistic understanding of this and then we'll go through a discussion which will include the applications and future directions. So this is the team. Um at the moment I've got uh me uh there's a co-author for a book I'm writing as well called Dylan and then there's Kirsten who is a psychology researcher at the University of Birmingham. So this is a project that we're working on. I'm going to briefly talk about this. This is a a book that me and Dylan are working on. We're using predictive processing and active inference to understand the basis for how ideologies are formed uh kind of from a foundational way building up to pretty much all the differences in politics but it's it's difficult to go into at this point. Uh if anyone has any questions about this happy to answer as well. Um so uh introducing the idea. Uh here we have the whole idea which is in a sense uh when you have uh a prediction and the prediction error uh goes wrong about something which is very emotional then you tend to have an emotional salience of uh attentional narrowing. So the threat uncertainty creates a predictive error minimization process but that also creates a neurom modulation of a temperature parameter which then creates a narrowing effect. So you consider fewer alternatives. Uh the thesis aims are to kind of create more of a unified understanding of the brain by adding together more of an understanding of what the actual parameters in the active inference uh equations link to. It's connecting it between a lot of different disciplines to try and understand more of how this this works. Uh a effect based attention is one of the most prime parts of this. It's uh how does emotionally salient information go through a basian distribution to try and make a a different precision waiting compared to more calculated predictions which is the normal direction of predictive processing. The research gap is is predominantly about the lack of a link between processes such as dominant response facilitation and attentional narrowing and active inference. And so using those two together, it it it aims at addressing things which have not really been talked about, but also connecting a lot of this together. I'm running through quite a lot because we have quite a few slides in the time, but the foundation. So uh it starts originally in the 1908 theory of the Jüks Dodson inverse Ugraph, which many people might know from Alevel psychology. Uh well that's a UK thing but uh yeah and the idea is that if you have a certain amount of pressure then your most reinforced responses will be facilitated. So let's say you're playing piano in front of an audience and you've been practicing for a very long time you'll actually improve your performance of playing the piano until the stress gets so high that you choke and you do even worse than you did before. This went on to be understood by Easterbrook as uh not just all arousal creates that. It's not excitement which creates this attentional daring process, but it's actually a negative effect for it. So, it's the uncertainty of some form of threat will then create a form of pressure. This form of pressure then facilitates a uh lack of consideration to alternatives. It's kind of automatic when it goes into dominant response facilitation, but he also connects it to belief formation. It's almost like a societal stress then facilitates a lack of um consideration of alternatives when you're creating an ideology or a uh belief about certain concepts. Uh I've included a few references in the slides if anyone is interested. There's quite a few more references but uh some of them are a bit key. Um so why hierarchal predictive processing? Uh uh well this is uh more about the idea that it kind of like connects these things in a way where we can actually add to more of a predictive understanding of the brain as a whole. It allows for a significant uh magnitude between uh interaction between the social phenomena and the predictive mechanisms. So anything which is dependent on motivational mechanisms has more of a uh ingrained understanding of it. Um uh so that's the uh attentional narrowing and now we've got the neuroscience behind it which is uh one one thing which is very strongly researched is the neural gain and emotions as computations perspective. uh we do know that having uh adrenaline in your system it's a kind of a neurom modulator for these sorts of processes and it does create this uh what what I'll show later to be the sigmoid function where the most reinforced the the most reinforced processes are are strengthened and the uh the other ones which are more uh the you have a lower probability of transitioning into these states is reduced Um so this is also enhanced by prefrontal cortical inhibition. So we do know that uh cortisol and uh catakolamines do uh increase the reactive to the the reflexive type of actions and they reduce the uh contemplative reflexive uh thought processes. This means that when you are under a lot of stress, it's it's difficult to contemplate and think clearly, but it's quite easy to react to sudden in uh situations and do the most learned and most reinforced behaviors. But it's more of an effective neuroscience look at things because it's opening and closing different pathways rather than something which is more ingrained in the computational neuroscience of seeing how excitable different neurons are such as which would happen in the neural game. So it's instead of resistance to uh stocastic resonance and noise which affects each individual neuron it would be more of a opening and closing of different pathways but it still has the same effect of the attentional narrowing mechanism. Um as we can see from reflexive it's more about the individual contemplative strategies of the individual. Um and as we can see from the reflexive, it's more about the reaction processes. It's uh it it's more of a slow acting process uh when we have uh kind of adrenaline rushing into our system and it affects the entire brain. So this is different to uh direct precision racing which you would normally see inside policy se selection mechanisms because you have this idea that there's a uh different exploration exploitation uh dynamic in which you kind of focus on the things which are the most expected to happen. They become more salient and when something unexpected happens about these most expected situations then you you kind of focus on that and then you dive into that type of information. That's such a a specific dynamical process that it's not something you consider as universally affecting all areas of the brain in a very uh emergent way where you have an individual neuron uh and the traits with those neurons actually affecting the dynamics of how the whole brain works. It's more about the actual processes of how free energy works in the brain. Um so stress from prediction error emotional veilance is the way in which you would kind of understand stress to come about. This is if you have a negative emotional veilance then you would have an emotion which does not uh it's not pleasant. It's it's something which is kind of like fear um anger uh sadness. These are all negative emotions. And because of the least action principle, people go down the idea of you want to avoid the negatives and you want to reduce the amount of energy the reduce the amount of free energy. So uh all negatives were associated with a rate of change increase with free energy. But the issue with that was when people use the idea of predictive error minimization, they tend to uh use the idea of everyone is always predicting everything and everything has to be a direct calculation. And that has been an issue. Uh the kind of like rationalizations people go about that is like a uh if you're surprised by a present which a friend has given you. It has filled the prediction of a social expectation of you being given a present. Um it doesn't necessarily have to be that type of rationalization but you can see how these things don't seem to have much intuitive sense behind them. And that's that's why when we have uh Joffly's um points we we delve into the idea of like when there's a prediction and it has an uh you predicted something but it becomes worse to you than what you originally predicted then that is still something you would say has negative emotional veilance and that's a very simple way of thinking about us but it still works in the way of even though it's a negative to what you actually predicted it is still an increase in free energy or predictive error mechan mechisms because you can understand that prediction might not be the best word for this and a few people have written articles on this. Uh one person has decided to determine that it's a uh instead of basian prior they say a basian uh preference. So it's a a basian prior distribution and a basian preference distribution. If we have the basian prior distribution, we can have the idea that there is a calculated waiting of what you expect to happen based on your uh kind of like uh prior uh opinion of that being that probability and it's very calculative. It's very much on this understanding of what is observed is is real and you're trying to get round to what is actually an accurate representation of things. But if you have certain sensory inputs and they might just be like, uh, I'm hungry. I need this. And as as if people know about the dark room, uh, situation, that doesn't always add up in the way that people understand how motivation works in in the way that prediction is is accounting for the the the hunger. And instead you kind of would have to have a a preference distribution a basian preference distribution which can be understood more instead of as predictions more as uh desires and drives which then weights the predictive mechanisms towards a certain direction. But this at the lower order uh functioning would still be uh would still be kind of a a basian prior in of itself because it's it's having an influence in the uh probability distribution to try and give you more probability to weighting your behavior in that direction. So it shouldn't really be understood as a basian prior prediction but more as a a driving force which increases salience of certain ideas. And this this leads into what uh my co-author and uh colleague in in the article uh uh is keen on describing as a human vs can't uh dynamic and the canian understanding of predictive processing is very much on their way of understanding the generative model. But it does ignore the fundamental idea that you can understand to a certain degree a relationship between desires and passions directing what you want as an individual. Uh they the fundamental thing is in a sense would you do anything if you didn't have a desire to move a desire to exist a desire to do everything? Uh or are you a method for the universe to know itself and you're just an emergent property which has calculations uh for the sake of it. It it doesn't make sense without there being a driving force which does count as the concept of a desire and these desires in a basian preference distribution can direct individuals uh behaviors and uh even their beliefs towards uh things that are important to them. Uh attentional narrowing in predictive processing. So as intentional narrowing uh relates to all this you can see that as uh you have a uh couple basian preferences and basian prize and they're in uh dissonance with each other there's predictive error because of the uh mismatch between these two and that can create the negative emotional veilance. This negative emotional veilance can then stimulate a neurom modulation of a attentional narrowing process which then affects the way that your decisions would be made. They attentionally narrow you. So you have less exploration to alternatives, thus making your decisions, especially in in societal uncertainty, a bit more rigid, a bit more deterministic and a bit more going down uh reinforced certain paths and this leads into the exploration exploitation trade-off. Going further into the mathematics, we can understand that there is a a tendency to explore a lot of alternatives or a tendency to uh exploit the very well- learned and very uh deterministic paths. And this is understood differently by uh according to different paths. But we've got the fundamental variable in predictive processing that relates to cognitive rigidity and attentional narrowing and that is the omega value. This is a stress induced sigmoid version function. It that means it's a it's a temperature parameter but an inverse of that. So one over the temperature parameter. What happens is we could know it is affecting all processes uh equally as as this as this. If if there was the same sigmoid function for every neuron, then you know if there's the same excitability of every neuron, then that would be termed as the sigmoid function because it is the same uh the the most reactive uh would be more reactive and more reliable and the least reactive would be the the less reliable uh making the the pathways a lot more deterministic. And it it shows for example in Nashal we have the understanding of how relationship uncertainty can create uh political absolutism. And this is you you can see how inside a precision waiting mechanism that shouldn't be the case. It shouldn't be that uh you've had something with a relationship. So you're going to become more absolutist in an ideological perspective. they they don't relate to each other, but somehow one of them affects the other, which can only really be understood outside of precision waiting in a more domain agnostic kind of perspective, though I don't think I'm using that term necessarily correctly. Um, sorry. Uh, so inverse temperature, just to run through what this is, it's it's the uh thing in thermodynamics where the more atoms you are hitting, the higher the temperature. Thus the more uh uh the higher a temperature you have the more attention you are paying to the the the less narrowed your attention. And following that you can see that uh that uh there is um a sigmoid function would then reduce the temperature because it would make everything go down uh a very linear path. uh you would only have the well rehearsed well-learned things which are going to be exploited rather than the directions which would be a lot more chaotic. It's almost as though the the chaos can add to like uh in the edge of chaos perspective we have a optimal functioning where we have the most exploration uh bordering on chaos with actually having the largest amount of complexity within a system which still has a function behind it. cognitive flexibility as the baseline parameter. This is uh the equation that we brought in uh which is the idea that uh the rate of change of free energy uh times by a uh ability to handle dissonance uh uh minus or added to the initial cognitive rigidity of an individual makes the uh attentional narrowed cognitive rigidity. And this parameter then can be used in the state change function. It it reflects cognitive flexibility in a number of different fields because you can see how a lot of people in certain uh psychopathological diagnosis diagnoses can uh do tend to have cognitive inflexibility in a way which would support this uh equation. And in the computational models we have the state change uh state transition temperature. So this one here is the the the main equation. Uh it's obviously not mine but there's the uh the omega value here which you can see times by the logarithm of the uh transition matrices which is uh the uh the next stage considering what the current stage is. And so uh when you have the log of all these values then you're pushing them which the high ones to the high point and the low ones to the low point and then you're creating a softmax function to guide these all to add up to one and that kind of allows them to be accurately mapped out inside a uh probability distribution or uh and this then makes the transformed uh uh transformed matrices afterwards. Um, sorry. And here's to go through the maths. If anyone wants to pause it on here, it might be a bit better, but I think I I went through the maths just [Music] then. Um, and here we can see when we combine this all together. So, the probability of the next stage considering the previous stage is equal to the soft max of this, which is the original equation that we came up with for determining how the negative veilance affects uh a new uh attentional narrating process. And this attentional narrowed uh original omega v variable then is multiplied by the logarithm of the uh transition m transaction matrix when and as you can see when it is uh low uh then this is the maximum amount of cognitive flexibility. This is when you can have a very clear mind and consider all the possibilities before you. But you may have choice paralysis. You may uh not be very comfortable in a fight orflight situation where the pressure of a situation is making you uh go to a sudden immediate action which is going to be the most learned action and you want to do it very well. And uh when you have it as deterministically as possible, even simple thoughts might be difficult because you might need to explore uh a lot of options around you and and even the most deterministic thing could just be to stand there and be frozen in the headlights. As such, uh this affects both belief formation and dominant response formation because we can we can see how this affects every aspect of of of life uh in in in our interests. it's in politics but uh obviously it does it does reflect in psychopathology and it does reflect in sport psychology. This uh leads to the biirectional dance of cognitive rigidity. So we do have the idea that um from the ground upwards so from the sensing to the actual thoughts we have how the environment affects the brain and that would be uh the stresses inside the environment and that's in the bottomup processes. So as we are in any societal uncertainty, it will create these prediction errors. And when these prediction errors are are manifest, they will then lower the uh temperature parameter which then top down goes to your actions which are to have more entrenched reinforced beliefs and it is to have uh a limited you you may jump to conclusions more easily. You may be fixated on certain points. You have an inability to change your mind about certain things. And you would also be more likely to do your well practiced responses rather than exploring alternatives. This leads to discussion. Right? So uh flexible minds nuance their ideas. This is uh this is something I find quite quite uh interesting in in this concept. So if we have this inability to transition from one state to another state then we don't really have the ability to consider other people's perspectives to add to and build on our ideas. If we entrench ourselves in our ideas, if we have rigid minds, if we have absolutist ideologies, if we have absolute things inside any any perspective, then we are unable to uh create the most complicated the most detailed uh concepts which you know in this leading to this uh ultimate complexity at the edge of chaos. It would never be achievable if we stick ourselves in what would be a uh which I should have addressed as a sub-optimal local minima uh in a sense of if we imagine a large landscape of of ideas and we can't explore other places and we can't get out of this hole of an idea we're in then we will never see a bigger hole of an idea which is a better hole. Uh we would have to get to the globally best hole. uh we would always be stuck in um the the rigid beliefs which can potentially lead to a lot of problems. Whereas uh having flexible nuance beliefs means we will have more integrated complexity in our ideas. In political theory that is how you get to the best conclusions. It's not necessarily that there's one idea which is better than another idea. It's just if you get an absolutist idea, you tend to have problematic stances on on a multitude of different things. It's it's uh better to consider as many perspectives as possible so you're aware of good ideas. But I believe there's a famous quote of uh it's good to have an open mind but not so open your brain falls out. But um there are a lot of a lot of nuances to every aspect and every rule that you can make both for yourself and for everything in in society. And this is in conjunction with cognitive dissonance and predictive processing. you can have uh an integration more more thoroughly with this based off the attentional narrowing details. So as we have basian prize uh something important to you is criticized which is in the basian preference distribution and that in conjunction with basian pride distribution of of calculations can then uh create uh the the resolutions in cognitive dissonance and these resolutions are either uh a effects um cognitions or behaviors. So these are the ideas in cognitive dissonance which are in contradiction with each other which cause the dissonance which causes the res rationalizations which make the theory of cognitive dissonance. Uh and so if you have an emotional uh pointer it could be an addiction to cigarettes and then you have a fact of cigarettes are bad for you. um this dissonance between them creates a prediction error and this prediction error then leads you to rationalize that uh cigarettes will help you lose weight or cigarettes will do these are these are common cult scenarios uh studied quite quite well but that that establishes how when you have attentional narrowing your consideration of alternatives reduced to such a degree that you're more likely to rationalize because it lowers your ability to see alternatives is as you move towards the rationalization making the rationalizations more distinct when things are very emotionally significant to you. Um and this leads connected to heristic adherance. So uh heristic adherance is very strongly connected to uh uh cognitive dissonance to a degree and uh the predictive processing mechanisms because heruristics um if you read the Daniel Conorman thing that they're generally held in negative light but heristics are are also often held inside just a tool for how you can do things throughout life. But if you are attentionally narrowed, then your heristic adurance is a lot stronger because uh to get out of your entrenched beliefs, you have to rely on something which is kind of an easy go-to card. And this uh this can mean that uh you are unlikely to uh nuance these heruristics. Um if you don't nuance your heristics however then you tend to justify perspectives in society which uh to a lot of people can seem very clearly wrong but if you're under a very large amount of emotional strain then it can seem more appealing to you. Um an obvious horistic which was studied in in marketing is the price tag. you rely on the price tag and but if you're really stressed, you don't really know what to think and you're kind of faced with this time pressure, then the price tag itself will be a reliance you'll have on the actual value of the item you are buying. But then you also have uh one of my favorite uh heruristics well one of the worst heristics but that I like to talk about is uh the just world fallacy/hypothesis and this is generally defined as uh everybody gets what they deserves and deserves what they get. In this perspective we have a justification for the status quo which uh you know could could be anything inside the most authoritarian of societies. It can be uh very distinct uh cultural dynamics which you feel you can't see why they happen but you're going to justify them because they exist for a reason because they exist. And this can cause a lot of victim blaming. It can cause uh the belief in a pretender fallacy. If you're in a situation where you do not feel like you deserve this and you do feel you feel like something is not right about things, it can be due to a backfire with a seristic. It can uh be in the general resistance to change which uh is endemic with uh uh the loss aversion tendency because people are generally against change even when it's beneficial and a just world hypothesis attaches onto that because the heristic adurance to the idea that everything must make sense or you know it it exists for a reason makes you unlikely to change especially when there is a lot of stress. So the attentional narrowing mechanism uh facilitates the predictive processing error minimization which causes more of reliance on the huristics which then reduce your ability to change in these situations and this is very strongly studied in relation to cognitive rigidity uh through how cognitive rigidity is a fundamental neuroscientific trait. It's more recent in the developments of political psychology, but it shows that cognitive fragility helps uh or forces people to be unable to change their mind and to create what they term as absolutist ideologies. So, does this better our understanding of the brain? I think combining attentional narrowing with co uh cognitive rigidity and putting them into a computational mechanism within the uh active inference models of state transitions does help give an understanding of the brain which enhances the predictive processing mechanisms and it's should help uh enhance uh every every uh step of its involvement with the the uh in involvement in in psychop ology in precision psychiatry because it it uh if you go into the area of psychology the the importance of how stress affects people is is incredibly significant and showing if there's biological components to this whether they can be reinforced or not. Uh some innate component which is outside of the direct environment which makes a difference between people is also interesting for the diagnostic criteria of what people go through. And that's where we get into the applications uh precision psychiatry. Um so schizophrenics and autistics um tend to have uh more uh cognitive rigidity. They tend to be uh cognitively inflexible is what they term it. But uh the resistance to changing their beliefs and the correlation they've had uh has actually led people to even ask the question of is cognitive flexibility the missing link? Is it the component in in the uh differences between people which which cause the genetic component? Uh because the genetic markers for autism and schizophrenia are vaguely strong and so the link between these two uh is is seen to be on the cognitive fragility which seem to be strong in both categories. uh inside predictive processing. People have also had the idea of uh the generative model and the recognition model being quite significant in how uh uh the generative model and the over-the-top uh focus on predictions and uh imagination of the scenario creates the preference for schizophrenic people to have hallucinations and uh delusions and come up with ideas outside of uh what people would normally expect to be realistic. And in the autistic situation, there's the sensory overload which is more in the sensory uh aspect of the recognition model. And that's uh over focus on the sensory information. Uh seems to be more in there seems to be a very large link between um autism and schizophrenia according to the disregulation perspectives of uh acts of inference. And that is why there's a relevance to schizophrenia because it uh it really the the idea of the uh the entrenching in beliefs is is is strong with the concept of delusions. So schizophrenics are also more likely to have conspiracy theories. And this entrenched belief system that they hold means that the cognitive rigidity uh appears to be a strong factor in what develops the problematic uh uh issues with with the diagnosis uh with suffering with schizophrenia. There is also educational benefits. So there are studies into the idea of uh just attentional narrowing in general increasing your focus and if you have a certain amount of pressure then it does help you study harder. Um this is importance in a lot of a lot of developments in psychology which can use the concepts of attentional narrowing especially in a mechanistic way to uh develop into other psychological concepts which then help understand how uh a drive towards supporting a value and ideal you believe in can be facilitated by the pressure of this ideal. It is almost as though when you have a bit of stress in your life sometimes laser focusing on a task can reduce that stress. Doing something which you uh is associated with your values can reduce a uh error process. A it can do an error minimization mech uh mechanism for for the actual issues at hand. And uh this also can understand how learned helplessness can happen from a error minimization process where uh you see what you are doing as being uh difficult to solve. So instead of uh when the when the attentional narrowing gets too high, you will go down to a simpler solution which is learned helplessness or giving up or disassociating from the concept instead of uh focusing on the task. The anxiety will get too high and it'll be harder to focus on that task. And understanding that inside a uh relationship between other metrics inside the brain can help understand what can cause learned helplessness and what influences can develop that. Further uh a respect for academia academia in in total can facilitate the uh importance waiting and the uh basian prior distributions in favor of uh doing better in academia. And it can actually uh according to certain texts for example the book the moral arc uh there's there's evidence that respect for academia and having a skeptic first mindset can facilitate a sense of morality in any country which holds those values which I think is quite significant and future research directions after the applications. This uh is in social and political psychology. These are areas in which I think attentional narrowing and cognitive rigidity are are profound. Obviously, cognitive rigidity is is pretty good for cognitive rigidity. If we have a computational aspect of that and we attach it to the mechanisms of of of predictive processing, then it will distinctly help. uh right-wing the right-wing authoritarian personality trait which is uh a uh kind of it's it's a development from something which is called the fascist scale which applies to both the far left inside a traditionally left country and the far right in a traditionally right-wing country most of all u but it's still called right-wing authoritarianism because of the associated of right-wing with traditional conventional attitudes and that being correlated with the concept of authoritarianism. Social dominance orientation is is kind of the idea of feeling as though there should be a dominance over certain groups. And all of these seem to associate with the concept of heruristic adherance in the political environment. It's it's the adherance to rules, the idea that everyone gets what it deserves and does what they get because of this authoritarian structure that you live in. Um that enhances by the intentional narrowing focus. And as such you can kind of see how they would not nuance their beliefs according to these dynamics of their society and they would go more absolutist into supporting of any ideological background especially when it's strongly associated with a basian preference and that uh that works for all of these all of these processes and they're all uh uh psychology theories which are very interesting and in social psychology you can see how they also relate in the same way. Uh game theory I'm not the most certain on but social facilitation is is the basic one about dominant response facilitation. Uh conformity under stress obviously would increase because you have the uncertainty enhancing the attentional narrowing even though it's not directly precision weighted. There's uh there's uh the threat uncertainty significantly influences your chance to conform. And even in the Dunning Krueger effect, uh there's a uh preference to narrowing your focus to only what you've experienced and not to an exploration of unknown profits. And so uh this this process is believing you're better than you are because you don't have much experience about what else is out there, which probably happens in the area of research and I'm hoping doesn't happen to be too much. But uh I I think that there's the idea of exploring other options instead of going down your singular path which which gives you more an awareness of the unknown unknowns. And then there's reactive approach motivation. So this is something which I think is a really good uh direction to take future research after attentional narrowing cuz this gives more of a holistic picture of uh how cult how when under stress you will do certain things which then make you more zealous. Um it's uh I have a I have a quote here which is uh if any adaptive change in the brain uh will minimize free energy then how does an adaption to stress minimize free energy and the adaption to stress doesn't always minimize free energy in in in that in that regard it aims to minimize free energy but because of the positive feedback loop it can loop things through quite a lot and in the way that reactive approach and vation tries to react to stress reactive approach motivation is that they find that any societal stressors will uh be reduced by disassociation from these societal stressors through a laser focus in an ideal that you believe in. You can distract yourself by focusing on something which to you has value and worth. And that does increase for example uh zealous adherance to a cult-like religion um in opposition to when you are suffering quite a lot in a lot of threat and certainty in your personal life and that can be enhanced by cognitive fragility when maybe the stresses are more effective. And uh then this is the conclusion summary of points. So from this we've got attentional narrowing from emotional uh uh stresses. Uh this creates uh the predictive error minimization from uh uh emotional stresses uh creates a increase of rate of change of free energy which then uh forces you to rely on on huristics to when when your attention is narrowed and you are too rigid inside your perspectives because you you then don't nuance these huristics and then you have a perspective on both society and actions in society. as well as a facilitation of uh of more learned like uh practiced piano responses in front of an audience type of situations of uh the the most reinforced neural connections and belief formations and belief that you don't really have belief updating. Sorry. Uh and it develops a more authoritarian outlook on things in society. And thanks and if you have any questions then you can email me and uh also you can ask for the email of either of my colleagues well mostly Dylan and uh Mr. Grove and it would uh be much appreciated. Thank you Alexander. So Daniel yes awesome thank you. Um, while I'm cropping things back, maybe share a little bit like how did you come to this project or how did you come together with these authors and what are you like looking for in terms of milestones in that collaboration? Um, uh, well, I I've I've, uh, been the co-author with Dylan for for a while and we've been writing a book which is the the foundations of ideology. So our our our our work in in trying to you know explain the political dynamics we came to quite a lot of conclusions about things when we did research very continuously coming up with a lot of ideas and and in our research we've we've read quite a few books on on between us on on active inference and there seems to be a very prominent gap uh uh what I what I hope to gain from it is to add to the community and to try and help as much as possible uh well to to ingrain myself in inside research and uh uh well the the book has been uh my passion project for for a while now and it's uh and it's now Dylan's passion project to a degree as well and uh we do believe that this will uh be good to add to the research community and it will help the world in the theory of how you know you can address certain things which will help a lot of people inside a diagnosis and in political dynamics reducing in the polarization of the world for example. So okay, lot of topics that we could go into. Um there's a few questions in the live chat and anyone can ask more questions. So I'll read some of those. Um maybe leave the slides up and we could go to a slide if it comes up. Okay. Um all right. Susan asks, "Is there any research on addiction to exploitation?" Um, yes. Yeah. I mean there well addiction to exploitation uh well the exploitation exploration trade-off is more of a machine learning term but uh the the the thing about addiction is is actually more towards the uh the policy selection process and that's that's uh not the state transition process necessarily and that addiction mechanism is more about uh kind of the gamma temperature variable rather than the omega temperature variable and it's It's it's kind of more about uh uh the the dopamine pathways and how you are uh reinforced into having I I I'm not I'm not super knowledgeable about that area, but I know it's it's more associated with dopamine. It's more associated with policy selection rather than state transition. And there is a lot of research on that from what I'm aware. Okay, here's a a question that I wrote down. Well, first the scope is very vast essentially encompassing our human cognitive niche ranging from differences in neurodeiversity associated with like context changes and different scenarios in a given day-to-day life to just different people different stages of life and then all the way into these social pieces. So Mhm. H how how do we think about these more system general cognitive phenomena with the domain specific phenomena and then also multistep kind of like rhetorical or justification phenomena like what do you think that model kind of looks like? The equations do give some pointers and reference, but what what do you see the puzzle pieces coming together looking like to bring to together like fundamental constraints of informationational systems with these system general stress and attention phenomena with ultimately the kind of domain specific models that are usually deployed in a specific generative model. Yeah. Well, I I mean I think the the specific generative models can work the best uh uh as as they are. And then this this uh this model just basically goes that when you explore in a sense in in any part of in any part of the marov chain, you are also forcing on yourself more of a rate of change of free energy. It's it's almost like uh any action that is taken will theoretically in their increase of free energy, they will potentially create stress. It's it's like thinking in a like if you were playing chess, you would force yourself to feel stressed just to try and solve a puzzle. And that forcing yourself to feel stressed means you are creating a tiny bit of stress which then narrows your thought processes. So it's not that it's it's that this stuff happens anyway, but there's very constraining mechanisms in place which just stop too much free energy accumulating during that same domain specific process. if the domain specific processes are are specific to to going along one direction from one step to another in a mark of chain rather than in a uh one thing affects everything dynamic. Thanks. Yeah, that was one of the parts I found most interesting uh in sort of the deep affective work and the way that you brought it out and and worked it here is like the re-entry of the rate of change of free energy into an equation cuz otherwise the the free energy values or the rates of change can be essentially epipenomenal like a model diagnostic used in training but then that generative model doesn't have re-entry or causal efficacy of the free energy itself. But then it is this really clever way to bring global dynamics back into the process of the domain. Like staying with that chess example, there's a time pressure and time pressure and choosing when to act is not always modeled in decision-m models. it'll just be this kind of like frozen universe and then a slot machine is pulled or a frozen universe and then a move is made in a teammates. So then when you start to bring in the the unfolding dynamics, it's it's this kind of like everything plays into that free energy value or rate of change and that provides the domain agnostic signal of basically how well things are going and then veilance has been associated with whether that is going better or worse than itself was expected to be. Yeah. Yeah. Perfect. I like the analogy. Um, okay. Another question from Susan. Could cognitive rigidity be related to a deficit in perceptual affordance acuity? Um, I think I think perceptual processes are are are a different neurom modulator. uh in in the way in which I got the uh the the the state transition from from a 2024 article uh there was a a uh aelco or aelcholine um uh parameter for for uh for perception specifically um I'm not too keen on on the knowledge of perception but I do know that there is in that area something more it's a different neurom modulator that's that's as far as I can go I I I do think that when you look at neurotransmitters and hormones inside the brain there is a tendency for um uh neurotransmitters to slightly affect other pathways. If if you look at how stochastic resonance which is the noise between neurotransmitters affect each other. It's not necessarily that uh you have to have the the thing which is normally activated by that neurotransmitter is only activated by that. There's like a slight effect from others. So I think adrenaline could affect your vision as well. But I think it's more about the the the ability to change your states inside those processes. So I I I I don't know too much about that area. H okay. On uh I think it was slide 30. Is that 30? Oh, wait. No, I'm getting the wrong way. Cool. Okay. Yes. Yes. All right. So, maximum cognitive flexibility is being associated with a uniform probability distribution over future states. So, um yeah, that's that's not true really temperature. Sorry. Well, it can't it can't be a uniform obviously. There's it's it's almost just that there's a temperature parameter adding in which is making you more rigid and only more rigid. It doesn't it doesn't ever go in the opposite direction. I mean there there is the idea that if you are happier about things then you are actually more cognitively flexible and there are there are studies which show that but uh I I don't think it can ever get to a uniform perspective. That's just a theoretical perspective of uh you know if if you have temperature and you put it in different directions. If I could see that in anywhere uh of of of an actual possibility, I would basically think there's someone stuck in one place unable to make any decision about anything because they're trying to see everything with equal possibility. And it's it's kind of like when you have the edge of chaos concept. So you have the ordered structure overfitting and then you have the uh over exploration actually into chaos. You know, you'll have strange attractors, you'll have other things, but it's it's it's not really information. It's not information in in a in enough of a structured way to mean anything in a goal-directed way. It it is just chaos. And anyone who is actually pushed to that point of exploration, they would not be able to have any structured beliefs and they would de devolve to chaos. But it would probably be closer to a praasia. It would be the sense of like a you know you you wouldn't have hallucinations or anything because if you have that much chaos a hallucination is still a structured dynamic process where you have idea to idea idea. It's almost a hallucination I would say is more rigid because you can't escape the hallucination even if you want to. Um whereas uh this would be more you can't even have a simple thoughts because you're considering so many possibilities. You're completely changing all the time. That's the way I think of think of it really. Yes. Interesting. So the more rigidity is just crystallizing or just sharpening definition on a given on the given contours of a belief. In this situation, it's a belief about the consequences of action. Um the the rigidity I feel like belief is is a oh wait sorry so the wait sorry what is the belief? Um well the B matrix are beliefs about how things are apt to change conditioned upon what actions are taken. Yeah. Um well I was thinking more in in a distribution of beliefs which are uh going to trigger other beliefs in the future. So if you have a basian prior which is uh kind of like a if it's creating an attractive dynamic of flow into a certain direction then what's the chance of that happening considering those chances but then if you multiply that by temperature then you would potentially make it more rigid and not transition into the next stage um so sorry can you repeat the question one one more time I I I'm just trying to to work out what is being made more rigid did in the B matrix and so well it's it would be beliefs are more rigid um in in terms of dominant response facilitation it would be uh you are being made more rigid in your your it's it's the fluid dynamics in the brain of information. So the the rigidity would be the attractive dynamic. It would be in a sense the information flowing throughout the brain is going through a singular path. And because it's going through that singular path, that means that you're uh not going to uh have more uh uh different options that you're considering. You're going to only have the uh uh singular dynamic of of playing the the piano inside that one direction. But uh in in a belief it would be that you would having more rigid beliefs it would be uh you have more entrenched beliefs being facilitated more which means that when someone is trying to convince you of an idea and your beliefs are very entrenched and you're under attentional narrowing then the chance that your belief will change will be very minimal. I think yeah I I I think I hear you and it may be interesting to parse out flexibility as the capacity to change from flexibility being the sharpness of a given distribution in a moment because you could have a very sharp belief distribution about successor of the next states or whatever it happens to be and that could be rapidly changing. or it could be fixed. And then you could have sort of uh um closer to a flatter distribution that also could be changing, but there's less room for change the flatter you get. With this extreme case like you brought up, it's like, yeah, does a blob have flexibility? It's like it doesn't even have enough differentiation to have flexibility cuz it's just sort of inert. Um question from live chat. Yeah. What did you mean by temperature? That's a great question. Uh temperature uh well it came from thermodynamics. So in in the understanding of temperature in thermodynamics you have more uh entropy which is more information happening. So, so when I mean temperature, it's it's it's uh originally the the term of just uh more stuff happening and then it in this it's used uh in the normal kind of reinforcement learning equations of the amount of uh options being considered. So, so in in this it is uh when you when you multiply it by the the the matrix which is the amount of coordinates in a graph which are pointing in a specific direction. So it's like a vector database. If you imagine, sorry, it's if you if you imagine uh weather and convection currents in weather, they are pushing air in one direction. And if you're mapping out a still image of this weather, you'll have arrows moving in different directions from where the convection currents are pushing things. You can then give numbers to all of these arrows. So all of these arrows are kind of like points inside this graph. And when when you have these these uh sorry when you have these points in these graphs, you can give them numbers. And sorry, this is getting uh way too complicated, but but um these numbers then represent the the amount of uh push inside a given direction and the probability of it going in that direction. And if you put this into a probability distribution like in in quantum mechanics, it represents the same thing as in fluid dynamics and inside graphing temperature convection currents. Uh sorry. And and uh then the probability of uh one thing moving from one thing to another thing is going to be uh like 10 or two uh and maybe higher or lower. But if it's a high probability then the temperature being uh lower means that sorry so that's the point when you have temperature lower uh the high probability is raised in its number when you have temperature higher that when you have temperature lower also the the lower probability is made lower sorry I'm not really in the best of zones for this but but temperature adjusts the probability so it makes more probable actions more likely and less probable actions less likely enough time using it in this. Yes. I think about Kelvin, the temperature scale, and how there's a basically a stopping of molecular motion. And so if we were to have a ball rolling on a table and the table were to be unmoving and we were to drop the ball on like one way to say it is it would find the lowest point or a little bit of a looser way is it would reflect the actual distribution of the hills and the valleys and then as you shake it more and more with higher temperature those differences start to matter less in elevation because there's so much energy being added in by the movement of the table that the small differences in in elevation are are basically outweighed by the random jostling. Yeah. Um yeah, finding the local minima through gradient descent. Yeah, it's a good metaphor. Okay, another question from and go. Yeah, go ahead then. I'll ask another question. No, sorry. I was just going to say yeah. Oh, sorry. No, carry on, please. Sorry. Sorry. Go for it. Uh so uh well I I would say I guess the the only way to escape a one of those dips is to add a bit of chaos into it and that chaos can also be understood as the temperature because it's not really efficient to try and get out of a correct answer which is the dip to find a bigger dip. So you have to have something which is a bit chaotic like temperature. Yeah. I I think the um way that you brought in the U curve response is going to be really interesting to see uh as you develop this out because like that reflective and and um reactive or those on the previous stress may increase the uh piano playing a little bit but then it doesn't it doesn't have a monotonic relationship. But then often times when we're working with like a preference vector or something like that just it's kind of like you just increase the preference just forever. So it's actually hard on to bring in those U curve like responses but those have a lot more biological validity when we start looking at the the tension between different different general systems. Yeah, that makes a lot of sense. If there was a preference for for something, I guess um any contradiction to that would create more free energy, which would then create more attentional narrowing in that regard. Okay, I'll ask a question from the live chat. Vtor wrote, could trends be identified in real time or near real time, do you think? I'm thinking of say collecting personal data and establishing a personal baseline. Um uh I think uh that's more of psychology research than this is computational neuroscience. But you could definitely you can definitely find trends in in real time and you can validate certain things based on uh how likely someone is going to like if you wait the importance someone has towards a certain thing then it it can it can definitely uh be be collected in real time based off surveys and certain bits of information. And then also you can probably do like galvanic skin response things to to check how uh much aversive arousal or negative effect someone will have and then see how their attention will be narrowed towards that especially when considering criticisms to things which they hold very important to them which would then be more more entrenched beliefs and more rationalization of these perspectives. It's it's possible, but it's uh I I don't think it's realistic and and it doesn't really I don't I I think uh it it's not based on this type of research necessarily, but it is something which is more based inside the theories it's building towards in psychology already. However, in these models, you're talking about observables and latent states of people. So, conceivably that does connect with some kind of self-report or biometric or other behavioral measure that would be used to parameterize the model. So what would that look like and h how do you see that being brought into practice? Um well uh I I think it's it's possible but it it wouldn't be super accurate. Um the kind of uh explanatory power of of this process is is pretty good and you can you can have some validity to it. You could probably do some significance test towards it. Um, but what you would probably do is just copy uh Leor's Migro's research on cognitive agility where she finds that cognitive agility through so card assortment tests correlates with the absolutist ideology and that then you can connect that to some other people's research on cognitive rigidity which is associated with attentional narrowing and then if if so these things are are quite well established and then using the uh active inference uh uh equations in in support of that just more uh gives an explanation for it rather than giving an enhance to the predictive power of it. um it can the the influence of uh computational modeling with with all these is probably beneficial and and if you had EEG scans on people's heads you could probably see the processes of error minimization in conjunction with this but uh it would it would probably look very very close to the research by Leor Migro and and it probably wouldn't be self-report either it would probably be uh just uh I think it's implicit cognitive fragility tasks that she does most of the time. I don't think she actually does much on on the self-report side of things. Okay, kind of zooming out a bit, how do you think ideology will evolve or change as cognitive science brings new insights into neuromchanistic aspects and real time and different influences on ideology because it's been I think as your interdisciplinary approach is showing there's like political analysis of psychological analysis of so as these puzzle pieces come together what is that going to look like and what ideology comes out of the wash there. Yeah. Well, I mean, I I think uh there's this tendency for people to always try and point out gaps uh to try and support a perspective that they'll have. And this filling of all of the gaps gives a gives a enough of a of a reasoning to try and go this is correct rather than this. And there's a lot of ideological perspectives that people have which are uh a bit problematic. And if you have so much science refined around the idea of it's bad to reject a nuance in a sense um then it it at least uh it builds up evidence for that that perspective. Um I I also think that um it can it can help in in structure societal change and a predictive mechanism for people inside uh debates with elites etc. Um, and these things can add to a a betterment of society and reducing the polarization. But, uh, if we're talking about uh the the changes of ideologies with consideration to these things, I think it'll only be uh if someone considers what we're saying, uh, then there's so much evidence behind it that it it can show it's bad to be absolutist. Basically, it's bad to not be nuanced inside any direction anyone takes. It encourages everybody, no matter who it is, to be a bit more nuanced and maybe Socratic and question themsel and never be fully certain about anything. H how do you feel that that might come into play in our discussions? like how would this how would this um for somebody let's just say experiencing that rigidity how would this land or what if rigidity remains a viable cognitive strategy even in light of knowing about it like in almost a sort of cooperate defect fashion like a global optima could be reached with two flexible parties but one rigid and one flexible leads to a different outcome. Yeah. Uh well, I I think uh if we're talking about rigid inside the the temperature dynamic, then it's good at going down a path. Um but if there's the option of both exploring and going down that path, then it's very unlikely that it's going to be correct. It's just there's a statistically less chance. Uh the the arguments of who will be better inside any political dynamic, um that's not really necessarily, you know, I can't say either way. you know, it's it's it's impossible to predict who's going to be better in any situation, but the probability that an unnuanced path would be better is quite low because it's it's a rejection of consideration considering alternatives. It's not a rejection of something because it could be wrong. It's it's it's even if even if like if you're considering alternatives, you could still go down the same path, but if you're just not considering alternatives, you're just lowering your chances of success. And that's that's what I meant more by the rigid. And if we have the assessment of the people in power, then it's more treating people like they have uh like if they are overly rigid and they're, you know, like in charge of of like Kim Jong-un in charge of North Korea, it would give a perspective of analyzing them not as a rational party, but as someone who can be predicted based off what they find is important to them and what they're likely to do on very uh narrow, rigid circumstances. It's uh you can probably give diagnostic criteria for them of what they're likely to consider in a lot of ways. And you can also point out that because of their rigidity and their lack of consideration of alternatives, they're very unlikely to act outside of very predictable metrics according to the dynamics they have chosen to act currently. Yeah. Two two things that makes me think of. First, the more templated or rigid a given actor is, the more predictable their behavior is in terms of their sense making and decision selection, which actually can be a strategic detriment. So, open openness or flexibility, it leaves leaves leaves the possibility open for action that's difficult to predict. Um and then also when we start to see the reasoning type models. So again to the sort of earlier question of how do marovian generative models come to capture multi-stage reasoning like processes and how do we model the duration of thinking in behavior. basically this reflective to reflexive continuum. Um the more rigid focusing just on the on a language model example, the more rigid the distribution of the next token, the less thinking matters because it's just being captured in small attractors. Whereas the the larger the vista for reasoning, the more combinatorics and the more semantic exploration can happen in that chain of thought space. And so there can actually be semantically important considerations and kind of a space for there to be adaptive updating. So it's a and then there's a fundamental trade-off because there's the time cost of thinking and there's also like rumination and so on. So there's no free lunch. There's no general strategy that can be you know in a system independent way and and that's not what the framework does. uh as you you basically said with the with the political case as well, it gives us these state spaces where these very grand tradeoffs can be elucidated and they apply importantly to different scales of deliberation like reflective and reflexive could be happening to a given person or it could be a group deliberative process. And so that points the way to a very interesting synthetic approach to understanding the the first principles of of biology and ourselves as political. Yeah. I mean 100%. Um it's the the the idea of um exploration meaning that you know you know you're in the exploratory thing so there's more exploration that the more thinking that happens and if you're in a rigid thing the more dramatic changes that happen I think is is quite quite uh apt but um but it's also interesting to consider that if you are theoretically open to a plethora of different options and you are exploring quite a lot then you are also going to have more of a normally distributed perspective on things whenever there are whenever there's a chance of noise cancelling out. So, so that that that sounds a bit odd, but basically um when you have uh a massive amount of exploration and you're considering everything, sometimes you can look the same as everyone else who is considering everything. Even though you are theoretically thinking more and you're doing a lot more uh you you you give the appearance of being you know more predictable and and more of all these things and and you probably are to a degree just because you have a normally distributed consideration of a lot of different alternatives rather than going down one absolute direction then dramatic change to another absolute direction. So there are there are issues with that. Um but yeah uh the the the reason why I was more interested in the predictable elements of a of uh authoritarians and their rigid mentality is because you can uh through a nuanced understanding of them give more of a distinct prediction to them than you could around someone who is exploring all the things all the time and trying to make accurate predictions of everything through a non- rigid mentality. But and it's sort of the U-shaped curve, the entropy curve returns again where in in one game situation the same move is always selected in the other. It's a uniform distribution. In both cases, while it's easier to predict the one move player than the specific square, you do know the distribution that the uniform player is going to select. So it's it it has a predictability but not in detail like the one move player does. And then in the middle are sort of strategies that have all this different complexity in terms of actually having adaptive possibility. Um yeah. So what are your next moves or how could people provide feedback or what are your what are you looking to kind of get to next? What are we looking to get to next? Um, uh, well, integrate ourselves with the active for influence community more. Um, talk about as much development as we can inside the area. Uh, we're very interested in the writing of this book that we have and and trying to get a career in the the computational neuroscience of politics, which would be pretty interesting. But, uh, what well, we're we're exploring all our options and trying to help out people along the way. Um I do like the idea of uh the sophistication in game theory as the predictable nature of of things. But I think uh I think that there was an interesting um study on on artificial intelligence and general intelligence and the deep learning of AI and it it kind of showed that when they trained a chessbot to predict one move ahead, it was actually better than when they changed a chessbot to predict it two moves ahead except through five times the amount of data. So there's a there's a strange thing which is that uh a higher level sophistication is more like you're just trying to go into the the chaos of the world. Whereas if you try and do everything one step at a time, a lot of the time it actually adds out to something better. Well, there's a a a joke we've had for some years like active inference only works for one time step, but you get to do it again and again and you can load everything into that time step, but you only get one because if you were able to plan out trajectories of multiple, it's equivalent to saying that you had already pre-imagined all of what you could have received. And if you want to do a roll out with all that you could have received from your first action in terms of all the ways that that could influence your second action, even with a small state space, you're already getting into these absurd rollouts. So that kind of is the justification for having a action perception loop that's ongoing, whether it's called runtime or real time or online inference or just active inference. Even when people don't really come at it from the free energy principle side, they're just thinking about online learning and about systems that do active data sampling, those kinds of processes. It kind of reaches to the same place, which is like there is information in the consequence of action such that you don't know what you're going to do by taking two steps ahead like you would by going one then one. And that's operationally how it proceeds either way. And that's the sort of paradox of planning where planning is commonly modeled going back to again same with our chess metaphor. They're modeled as these trees of different possibilities and branching. But we know that that is not what happens in the way that planning proceeds um or even if planning explicitly proceeds in analog systems in the same way. Yet it can be approximated with this sort of branching counterfactual play. However, in a one time step limit is sort of where biological systems have tuned themselves to. Yeah, makes sense. I think uh it's easier to think of things in in uh in in exploitative terms because there's less free energy. So it's it's I think maybe people delude themselves to thinking that they can plan three steps ahead just because uh it's I don't want to think about the other steps anyway. I want to think everything's this easy, but I don't know. Yeah. Well, in a in a reward or pragmatic value only setting, if you're considering one time step at a time, you do get greedy behavior. But then if you have epistemic value as a real contender, then you can still have action selection reflecting learning in that next time step because the expected information gain is legitimately valued. And so that can even say like well I know that there's going to be a slight benefit if I go down that gradient but there might be other information if I go up the gradient of pragmatic value and so by bringing the information gain into that next time step then at least there's the possibility of of making co-accounting for epistemic and pragmatic value then that's exactly what the kinds of modifications and and attention variations that you're describing get I think so. Um I I I think there's there's an interesting uh study which is Axel Rod's study of tit and it kind of showed that uh consideration of um uh if you if you try and do the the prisoners dilemma like over and over again then you know the idea of there there's a you know in a study where it's everyone says the the best things you can do for yourself is to focus on uh only doing the thing that'll betray the other person and and selfishly get you the best points. And you should always choose that option inside this prisoners dilemma. But in in the study where they did it 50 times in a row and it was computer programming trying to do them against each other, everyone thought let's make the selfish bot which can try and take advantage of the other people cuz we're competing to try and who has the best bot. And all the selfish bots did a lot worse. It was uh the most forgiving bots did the best. It was people who did it better than a tit fortat basis across all the examples of interactions they went into. They did the best. And it's it's not that in each individual situation they did the best because they would have a bot which could either draw or lose but across every interaction their average amount of points was always the best which kind of kind of does show your thing about doing things in a individual basis. You're doing it one step at a time. Then that would be a lot worse for you as an individual. But if you have consideration to this vaguely nuanced perspective of being cooperative in society, being a cooperative organization or a cooperative country across all the interactions you have, even if you're not doing it, if you're doing it in a I draw or I lose, because of the plethora of good cooperative techniques you have across all the situations you're in, you do a lot better than someone who does things selfishly. And that's that's I think very similar to that. Totally totally agree. Awesome. Yeah. It's also if you're interested in global change game, it's a this thing uh when they put people who have very strong right-wing authoritarianism into a game and it's a 4-hour simulation of controlling the whole uh world. And um uh when they put very strong uh super authoritarian people inside the game altogether, they started off giving each other wedgies, wrote on a piece of paper, look after your own, take care of your own type of thing, and then they committed nuclear war on each other. It was the worst game they'd ever seen. They had to restarted and then there was more nuclear war. And in the opposite, when they had the least authoritarian people in there, they weren't, you know, going, I will bomb you or you give me all your money type of thing. They were going, let's try and work together. Even though it was meant to be a competitive game, they apparently had the most cooperative game they'd ever seen, even though 400,000 people in this world scale dynamic thing still died. And it's it's an interesting look at the reflection of how cognitive rigidity because it's attached to right-wing authoritarianism because the the traits are being conventional, authoritarian, authoritarian aggression, submission, and conventionalism. uh cognitive fragility is a strong factor in how cooperative people are in political dynamics and also how much political dynamics can be reduced to chaos and yeah a lot of ways to go with that but I mean your presentation and and hopefully the forthcoming works will bring some of that thinking out more and I look forward to seeing. Thank you. Thank you so much. Anything else you want to say or ask? Uh, no. I mean, it's been a pleasure. Um, thank you for the opportunity. I'm sorry if I didn't do the presentation very well. I kind of sprinted through quite a bit of things and and such, but I really appreciated it. Thank you. Yeah. Hope people enjoyed it and follow up with the contact if they have any additional comments they'd like to provide and good luck with the work. See you. Okay. Bye. Yeah.