ActInf GuestStream 123.1 ~ Marcelo Guzman: "Learning in Physical Systems"

> Source: YouTube
> Playlist: GuestStreams
> Duration: 1:17:24 | Uploaded: Unknown
> Transcript method: auto_caption

Hello, welcome. It is November 5th, 2025 and we're in active inference gueststream 123.1 with Marcelo Guzman learning with physical networks. So Marcela will give a presentation and then I will read some questions from the live chat. So thank you for joining to you for the presentation. All right, thank you Daniel. Thank you for the invitation. So I'm Russell Gusman. I'm a postto at University of Pennsylvania and today I want to talk about learning with physical networks. So one such example is the one that you're seeing to your left in your in your video. This is an electronic circuit. Okay. uh seems kind of complicated but this electronic circuit has a property that's able to self adapt and by doing that it can learn machine learning tasks like a computer like an artificial neural network. Um the topic of my talk is going to be centered around two papers that appear this year. One is microscopic imprints of learn solutions in tunable networks. It's open source in PRX. And the other one is physical networks become what they learn which is in physical review letters. And in a nutshell, what I want to tell you is how physics shapes the way these machines learn. All right? And hopefully by the end of this this talk, you're going to understand this picture that is appearing to your right and I'm going to explain it to you later. So let's begin with with learning. So when we think about learning, we have these two big paradigms right now. We have this very trendy paradigm of machine learning. Okay? And on the other hand, we have our brain or what happens in biology, what I call biological learning. And these two paradigms are very powerful although they are very very different. Okay? And so here I'm listing some of the differences that uh that that are in between these two. For example, in artificial neural network, what you usually do is to modify the weight parameters. Current technologies, current uh large language models have around 10 to the 12 parameters. Everything is digital. Everything is happen in your computer or uh in data centers. It's very energy demanding. Everything is centralized by CPUs or GPUs and it lives in the virtual world. There is no physics. Okay. On the other hand, if you consider the brain, what you do with learning is you modify this synaptic strength. You have around 10 to the 14 synapses. Everything is analog and from time to time you go to the to the digital domain. You have this spikes very energy efficient. Okay? So to operate the brain you just spend as much power as a light bulb. is distributed that is you don't have any uh any CPU or GPU and it's subject to physical laws. So but learning is a much broader phenomenon. Okay. And what I want to introduce now is a third paradigm that we call physical learning. So these are two these are this is one example of a physical learning system. So this is a resistor network. Okay. So all the edges are resistors. This is the experimental realization. And what this resistor network does is to modify its own conductances. All right. And there and therefore by that learning uh machine learning task. It has around 10 to the two parameters. This is a very novel technology. Uh it's completely analog. It's energy efficient. It's fast. It's distributed. And what I want to highlight is that it is also subject to physical laws. All right? You cannot circumvent those. So why do we want to study this kind of third paradigm? And there are two main reasons in the community. One reason which is more on the engineering side is to improve the current technologies of machine learning. Can we make artificial neural networks more energy efficient? Can we increase the speed? Can we make it more robust to damage? But there also the fundamental part of it and this is uh what uh what I'm interested in is that maybe by studying these kind of systems we can understand some more complex biological phenomena. These physical learning systems are simpler than biology and yet they are complex enough to display learning. All right. So let me begin by introducing a dictionary. So what is what in this learning physical network? I am going to take as a starting point an artificial neural network. Okay. And I'm going to compare side by side with this learning resistor network. So the nodes in an artificial neural network are basically the neuron activations. In the resistor networks these are going to be voltage nodes. The edges in an artificial neural network has the weight parameters. In the resistor network, it's going to contain the conductances of my edges and the external inputs are fed as input data here X in the artificial neural network. Whereas in the resistant network, it's going to be fed as input current. So how do we convert inputs to outputs? That is what is the forward problem or what is the input to output relation and what is the inference problem. So in an artificial neural network what you do is you take some inputs you multiply them by a weight matrix W1 for example and then you apply a nonlinear transformation let's say a sigma function and then that result you multiply it by the next matrix weight matrix layer u and then you apply a final nonlinear transformation so that's why you go from X to Y the output in the resistor network what you do is you are going to apply the current. Okay. And then you're going to let the system do it its thing. Let physics work. That is the equilibriation part. So currents are going to be reaccommodated in the network etc etc. You wait till it reaches the steady state and you're going to select one of the nodes or a handful of the nodes and you're going to read out the voltage that you obtain. And of course the voltage is going to be a function of the conductances and the currents. So notably this is this is where where the key difference lies. This process of equiliberation must obey physical laws. And for example in um in a resistor network there are two laws. One that is called the cure current law. That is at every single node in this network all the current in must equal the current out. And also uh for every loop the voltage across the loop must be zero. That's circus voltage law. So this is a physical constraint. No matter how your circuit is designed, you have to buy this. Uh so inference in this problem is defined by physics. And now we have also the inverse problem which is basically learning. So what you do in an artificial neural network is that you want to update the weights such that you decrease the cost. And the the cost is basically a distance between the output Y and a desired output white hat Y hat. In learning uh for resistor networks, you basically update the conductances K to decrease the distance between what you obtain as a voltage output and what your desired voltage output is. All right. And this not these networks are built in lab. So here what I'm showing you is an experimental learning resistor network um built by my colleague Samo at UPUP. Uh here I'm highlighting in red one resistor. Okay. So this is one adaptive resistor and each of these resistor is able to update its conductance value based on pure local information just based on the voltages across its terminals and it learns through a learning rule called couple learning. So if you want to know more details about this experimental circuit, you can check these two references. Um just for this presentation I'm going to show you a video um of a classification task performed by this machine. So this is a very simple task but it's it's helpful for visualization. Um basically you have two axis here axis the horizontal and the vertical axis representing inputs one and two. All these data points are training data points and the goal of the of this task is to place a decision boundary right in between these two classes of points. The background color is the prediction of the network at the very beginning of training. So it's basically everything is blue. But as training progresses u and this is experiments the network is able to correctly place this decision boundary in a couple of seconds. Okay. So these networks work. Now what we have to understand here is that physical learning in this system is a double optimization problem. So let me explain this. For the forward problem that is from input to output we have this process of equilibriation and let me take the simplest kind of systems we can consider linear resistors that is you have to be ohms slope that is basically the statement that the current at each edge is basically the conductance of the edge times the voltage drop of that edge. So if we consider that kind of system then equilibration is basically the minimization of the electrical power that is whatever you get as a physical response minimizes this power and the electrical power is basically the energy per unit of time that you are consuming. So this mathematically is the sum over all the edges of the conductance times the voltage drop square such that the response is basically the minimizer of the power minus the input constraint. Um geometrically you can think about this power as a physical landscape. All right as a physical landscape in a very highdimensional space of voltages. So here I just put a cartoon at the bottom. um each axis represents the voltage of one of the nodes. So for this picture I have 4x4 nodes that is 16 dimensions and over this land over this space I'm going to define the power and under the physical response the voltage response is one is going to be the one that minimizes this this one. So that's one minimization. Where is the second minimization? Well the second minimization is learning itself. All right. To solve the inverse problem, you have to update the conductance to decrease the cost. And so you can see that learn solutions are the minima of this cost landscape. Now notice that this is another landscape that lives in a completely different space which is the space of parameters, the adapt the adaptive parameters, the space of conductances. and learning solutions learn solutions are at the bottom of this very very well. So let me just zoom out a little bit. Uh so this is the fundamental difference between an artificial neural network that only minimizes the cost and a learning resistor network that has to minimize the cost and the power. And so you may say well this seems like a more complicated problem. So instead of one minimization have to do two minimizations. Uh but it turns out that the minimization of power is automatic. This is just nature doing its own thing. And I'm going to show you further that because of this double optimization problem, we can get some very nice results and intuition of the inner workings of learning in this process. All right. And also let me mention that this physical learning as a double optimization is very general. It is regardless of the architecture you use. You can use the grid network that um my colleagues built in the in the lab or you can use a completely disorder network. It is independent on the learning role whether you use gradient descent stoastic gradient descent couple learning heavian learning it does not matter and it is independent of the on the learning task whether you use classification regression or you name it so it's it's a property of this physical learning systems so what are the consequences what are the consequences of this double optimization problem and to walk you through this talk I want to introduce a very simple example which is learning one data point. So some people may say oh but this is not learning this is just fitting one data point maybe but I think this is going to be it's going to fix some ideas. It's going to be very intuitive. So consider the following. Consider a disorder resistor network of 300 nodes like you see in the picture and roughly 700 edges and consider the following task. Imagine that I input current I such that at these nodes blue and red the voltage is going to be fixed at zero and one. And the goal of this is and the goal of the task is that very far away at these two nodes I would like to have a precise voltage value of 099 and 001. All right. So let's say we begin with all the conductances being equal to one. So here the conductances are colored uh here the edges are colored according to the conductance value. You can see that they are all one. You apply the input current. You let the system accelerate and what happens is that the voltage response is going to minimize the power. All right. So here what you're what you're seeing is the voltage value. All right. The voltage value of every single node in the background as the response of the system. You can see that where I input zero and where I input one, I have blue and red. But as you go far away from these two nodes, it everything goes like in between to the gray area in which the voltage is 0.5. Let me give you a little bit of more detail to the forward problem. So I told you that the power is the sum of over the edges of the conductance times the voltage drop. Mathematically speaking, you can always write this down as a vector of voltages times a matrix H times the vector of voltages if it's a quadratic form. And this matrix H is what we know as the physical hessen. All right, that's a good hess. It's just the second derivative of the power with respect to the voltages. And this is where all the conductances get into play. So this H matrix depends on two matrices delta and K. K is a diagonal matrix of all the conductances and delta it is known in network u u literature as the incidence matrix. So it's basically telling you the connectivity of your network. It is going to be one if an edge is connected to a node if it is incoming minus one if it is outgoing and zero if it is not connected. So, so the power can be written in terms of the hess of the physical hash and therefore the response of the system it is in is it is it can be written in terms of the physical h it is the inverse of the physical hession times the input current. So that's exactly how you get the voltage response of the system and then once you get the voltage response you measure at these two nodes of interest and you see what you obtain. So here this measurement I put it in terms of a projector meaning that out of all the voltages that I obtain from my response I will only project into the two voltages of interest two nodes of interest and what you get according to this to this uh color bar scale is that everything is roughly 050. All right but this is not what what we wanted. What we wanted was like a voltage output very precise of 0.99 and 0.01. So what you have to do is to modify all the conductances to begin with. All right. Um so I'm not going to consider a specific learning rule but I'm going to show you one possible result uh solution to this problem. In particular obtain this result by using couple learning on simulations. But this is a possible uh solution which is kind of interesting. So you can see that to the left the network developed a crack a line of very very low conductances as you can see by the color. This line is basically separating the system into two sides. One side that remains with very high voltage in the voltage response in red. the other side with very low voltage and the in such a way that the output nodes are just on one side of the other of this crack and therefore achieving this function. So at the end of training whether for this task or another task what happens is that you are at the minima of two different landscapes in two different spaces. minimum of the power, one minimum of the power, one minimum in the cost. So what can we learn about these two these two minimum and what I want to do now is to give you some geometric intuition of these highdimensional landscapes. So first a geometric picture of the cost landscape around the minimum. So imagine you're at a minimum of the cost. Okay. Now what I can do is to tailor expand this cost. Uh the the zero term is going to be a constant which is the the cost that you obtain at that minimum. The first order contribution is going to be the gradient. But since we are at the minimum that gradient is zero and therefore the next non-negligible contribution comes for from this second order term which is K minus the solution K times a matrix H which is also a hessen. although a different h times k minus k solution. And this caligraphic h is what we call the cost h that is the second derivative of the cost with respect to the parameters evaluated at the solution. And since we are at the minimum this is a symmetric and positive semi-definite matrix and it has a very nice geometric geometric interpretation. The igen values of this matrix are the curvatures in this highdimensional landscapes along directions defined by the IG vectors. So let's take the the previous example. So we found this learning solution. Let's compute the cost hash spectrum evaluated as the solution. And what we find is the following. So here what you're seeing are all the values are all the values. You have as many values as edges in your network. So around 700. Uh this is a log scale. And you can see that out of the 700 values are extremely close to zero are very very small. So what that means is that you are in this very high dimensional space and in 699 directions the landscape looks flat and there is one direction there is one value that is way larger than the next value by seven order of magnitudes that is in this high dimensional space there is one direction in which the curvature is just huge it's gigantic all right meaning if you take if you move along this direction. You can think about this as the great canyon rim to rim. You take a step into this direction and you climb up the cost by a lot. By the way, this phenomenon is also observed in deep learning. So this is a property of learning in general. Okay, you have a few stiff igen modes. So what is this direction? What is the direction in which the curvature is extremely huge? That's what we call the stiffen vector. the SIF cos vector. So remember that um this steep vector lives in conductance space. So I can assign each entry of this vector to its corresponding edge. And here I'm plotting the IG vector over the graph. You can see that most of the entries are zero or yellow except for this crack. Along this crack, the entries are huge. meaning that if you perturve any of these edges in black, you're going to basically climb up the cost and you're going to destroy the function. And this is a very sensitive, it makes total sense because if you look at the solution itself, the solution is a crack of low conductances. If you were to increase any conductance along this crack, you're basically going to short circuit your network or you're going to lose the function. So um the take-h home message here is that the large entries of these stiff cost agent vectors are the key components for your learn solution. And what we did with uh with my colleagues was to basically relate the geometry of this co cost landscape to the geometry of the physical landscape. So we observe the following. So I told you that the cost hash describes the curvature around the learn minimum in conductance space. In the same sense the physical hash describes the curvature of the physical landscape the power in voltage space. And what we observe is that the stiff coing vector the direction in which the curvature is the largest matches very well the soft physical vector. that is the direction of my physical landscape in which the curvature along which the curvature is the smallest. All right. So you can see that here this crack in which the edges are in black are basically the line separating the red from the blue region. Not only that, but we run more over 2,000 uh simulations of different networks with different initial conditions. And when we plot the cost value, the stiff cost value with the softest physical value, we have this neat power law power to the minus 4. And so this was a first suggestion. And and and this first suggestion was that it is possible to know the function from pure physical information. That is you hand them you handle me a network I can measure the hessen. This is a physical property of the network which is regardless of training data regardless of a task I can measure the hess and by measuring the hessen the physical hessen I get information about the cost landscape about what it was trained for. uh and so and and we get we got very excited and we call this paper physical networks become what they learn because at the end of the day you train the network and everything gets imprinted into the physical landscape and we can measure that physical landscape. So these are uh just a few properties that I'm highlighting here. We also studied the dynamics of learning but I'm not going to touch on on that subject today but all right let's let's continue so we had this relation sorry we had this relation between stiff cosign vectors soft physical vectors uh but it turns out that the relation is much more complex when you have more than one data point okay so everything uh I showed you was for specific example of one data But learning is about more data, right? And we realize that stiff cost vectors are not simply the soft physical vector, but there is still a relation. Uh just to give you a simple example [clears throat] uh in which the relation is more complicated. Consider this network here. You have two sources in red, two inputs in red and two outputs in blue. And this network was trained to perform a linear regression. That is I want the voltages at the output to be a linear function of my voltages at the input with precise very precise coefficients. Okay. So the network will train in silico and it found a solution. And for these cases for example the simple relation between stiffing vectors and softening vectors does not hold anymore. You can also consider more more complicated tasks in which you have to classify data into three classes. Um and so these are two examples of systems uh which are more complicated and we needed to understand and so we have to dig deeper and this is the context of the second paper microscopic imprints of learn solutions in tunable networks. Um I'm going to spare you all the tedious math and I'm going to give you just the the high level results. Um but at the end of the day we showed we demonstrated mathematically and confirmed numerically uh that for any any uh double optimization problem physical learning you have a structure function we can find a structure function relations and this is what I mean by that. We show that the cohesion at the end of learning deco composes into two parts. One that's pure training and the other one that's pure physics to be more precise. So if I write down the J component of the cosession I can write it down as the contraction of two tensors two high order tensors tensor L and tensor S. To avoid all the index notation I'm going to just write this as four dots in here. So what is L? L is what we call the training tensor. All right. So let's consider I have R data points. The L tensor is going to be the sum over all the data points of the projector Q times the input data I times the projector Q times the input data I. Um so this funny symbol here is just an outer product uh symbol. And you can see that this doesn't contain any physics. It's just input data. Okay, this is the information you train your network on. And on the other side you have what we call the tuning susceptibility tensor. This is also a higher order tensor um is the outer product of the same vector four times. And this vector is what we call the susceptibility vector. Here is where the physical hash appears. the inverse of the physical h and this again is only physical information. All right. So where is the function and where is the structure? I told you structure function relation. Well the function is encoded into the hessen into the cost hash by this geometric picture and the structure is encoded into the tuning susceptibility. This is all the information of the network the connectivity and the conductances. You can even go you can even go sorry to a deeper level and show the same relation not only at the level of the hessions but at the level of the stiff cost I vectors. So you can show that the stiff directions that I show you in these landscapes can be written down in terms of this susceptibility the normal susceptibility and the unit vector susceptibility. And this matrix A is basically what contains the learning information would be the analog of the matrix L in here. So next question is well what is this susceptibility and how much information it contains about the function. So I told you susceptibility is the outer product of the same vector four times. uh you can see it four times that means that the physical hian inverse appears four times and that's basically what I explained in the previous observation that the scaling relation is power to the minus 4 the susceptibility is also a physical observable it's a physical property in fact SI alpha that is the alpha entry of SI is the voltage of ati due to a unit current at node alpha here I'm showing you one example Here I'm showing you I'm plotting the susceptibility of this green edge. So that is the voltage drop at this green edge when I supply voltages uh currents I'm sorry at different node locations. You can see that near the edge the susceptibility is large but as you go far away the susceptibility is very low and for each edge you can compute its total susceptibility and you can plot it in over over the graph and what you see is this structure emerging. So uh so let me let me let me show you what we can do with this. Uh so consider the 2x two regression example that I showed you before. Let me show you the cost landscape picture. Before training before everything the the cost values are just distributed all over the place. But after training the co values become degenerate almost all values are close to zero and in this case you have four stiffen directions four stiffen values. These are the four stiffen vectors. Okay. And what we obtain from the physical landscape that is I only measure the susceptibility is a pattern that resembles a lot the ste vector. In fact, if you compare them one to one, here I have four different colors indicating the four different vectors. You can see that large susceptibilities that is edges with large SI correspond to large to edges with large entries of Igen vectors. So the large susceptibilities reveal the key components. Okay. And this is for one example, but you can do it for 2x5 regressions. And once again large susceptibilities correspond to the large entries. You can do it for classification tasks. And in all these cases you observe the same trend. All right. Now notice that this is not perfect because I don't have the complete information. This is what we can infer by doing physical measurements. And then we we also run a lot of simulations and we observe a lot of properties. For example, we observe that in across all our systems, highly susceptible edges tend to block current. So here to the left, what you're seeing, we're looking at is the susceptibility. So white means low susceptibility. Uh black means large susceptibility of a train network. And when you compare these large u susceptibility edges which are highlighted in green and you compare it to the current that it flows through them you can see that high susceptibility corresponds to very very low current. All right. So here to the right what you're seeing is a vector field plot. The direction of the arrow indicates indicates the direction of the current. The magnitude of the current is in color from white to black and precisely in the same regions in the same green regions you see zero current. Um we also observed that the susceptibility is dominated by soft physical modes. So here in the y-axis forget this notation in y ais what I'm plotting is the susceptibility computed with the first n physical modes over the susceptibility computed with all the modes. So you can see that by consider only a handful of modes I quickly reach one right meaning that susceptibility is governed by these soft modes. Um and so in summary what we have is the following. We have that learning in these resistor networks is a double optimization process. All right minimization of power and minimization of cost. We showed that uh in these two papers that because of this double optimization process we have a general structure function relation. We can measure the key components from the most susceptible edges. And that's the picture that you are seeing here. This error mode is basically the stiff cost vector. And on the other side you obtain what you measure from the tuning susceptibility. And these are the two head the the two sides of one coin. And we have basically a new tool to study and interpret learn solutions in physical networks. Uh so everything I told you was in the context of linear resistor networks. But it turns out that this is way more general. So in fact this is applicable to any system with a double optimization. It is applicable to any continuum nonlinear system. What we did at the end of the day was tailor expand around the minima of two different landscapes. And one such example are mechanical networks. So mechanical networks minimize energy. You have an elastic network. It has its physical response minimizes energy or free energy if you're adding temperature. Um and you can tune you can tune the network you can tune the stiffness you can tune the rest length and you can tune the the network to do to to perform a desired behavior. In fact nonlinear nonlinear elastic networks even though you have springs can be nonlinear in the energy. Um here just to give you the translation of the dictionary the nodes are displacements the edges contain stiffness and the extra inputs are the input forces. So this is also a kind of system in which you can apply this formalism of physical learning and you can even go beyond what is actually considered learning. So u consider for example protein alustry. So I want to show you that protein alaster can be seen as a double optimization process. So what is protein alaster? Consider consider a protein here in green. A regulatory molecule comes to bind to the protein. That binding induces a long range deformation that then allows a lian to an extra molecule to couple to it. All right. So in order for this uh confirmation h confirmational deformation to be useful you need to have the right set of parameters. This is a very precise deformation and evolution on say uh has minimized the error has maximized the fitness in terms of these parameters. Now the parameters can be the sequence of amino acids or or the DNA sequence. So this is one optimization problem just evolution but physics obliges you to minimize the free energy as a function of the informations. So once again double optimization and it turns out that proteins are studied as elastic network models today. So the question is can the susceptibility predict the most important amino acids for alo steady the most important parameters and this is a problem that I would say uh in a more canonical sense it's not considered learning but it turns on that you can frame it as a learning problem. All right. Uh so this is my last slide. Let's zoom out a little bit. Everything I told you was about physical constraints. Everything I told you was came from the fact that these systems minimize minimize power or energy in addition to minimizing the cost. Uh this is only one type of physical constraint. There are many many others. For example, when you actually build the systems, these are analog systems. You try to build the system, you try to build it as neat and cleanly as possible, but inevitably you have imperfect components. That's a reality of our physical physical world. You have imperfect components. It turns out that when you learn with these imperfect components, you get some very interesting behavior. We get that our learning rules are being modified. Uh if you want to know more about this uh we have this archive paper on understanding and embracing imperfection in physical learning networks in which we show how these physical imperfections like um unexpected bias can impact the learning dynamics of these systems. When you have power and energy minimization and you couple that with noise and nonlinearities, you can actually deise out of electric circuits restricted B machines of very similar behavior as the restrict machines and with that you can have unsupervised and probabilistic learning with contrastive local learning networks. So that's the name of these networks contrastive local learning networks. Uh you can also check that out in the on the archive. And also another property of real systems is that they have limited sensitivity. That is they cannot respond to any tiny minute gradient. All right. It turns out that if you apply if if you consider this ingredient to these physical networks that in addition take space take real space. This limited sensitivity can be beneficial and can avoid can help overcome what's known in the literature as catastrophic forgetting. This is soon uh going to be on the archive so stay tuned. Um and with that let me thank you my collaborators uh that took part on these two papers Philipe Martins um Nis VJ Balis Braman and Andre uh who is in the chat now and also thank my funding sources um and let me take any questions you may have. Thank you. &gt;&gt; Awesome. Thank you. People can write any questions in the live chat. Andrea, would you like to give any any comments or any questions? Well, uh, maybe just to say I mean Marcelo, I'm sorry I had to miss the beginning because I was teaching, but um, &gt;&gt; and probably Marcelo made this point, but I think it can't be made strongly enough that, um, you know, uh, when when you use physical networks to learn things, of course, there are disadvantages compared to neural networks on the computer, but they're also really significant advantages. um you know you know and in addition to practical advantages for example a lower energy consumption and stuff like that I think um the there's a huge advantage in terms of our ability to understand the nature of the solutions um &gt;&gt; and and this because we have this double optimization process and we can just look at the physical aspects and they tell us so much. It gives us a a really nice handle into how the system is learning things, the kind of solutions the system learns. &gt;&gt; Mhm. [clears throat] &gt;&gt; Cool. All right. I will read some questions from the live chat and some questions that I wrote down. So, first question from Bert. Very clear presentation question. How do you experimentally measure the susceptibility in a real electrical network? &gt;&gt; Oh yeah. let me go back here. So let's say you want to measure the susceptibility of the green edge here. What you basically want want to do is to apply a unit current at a given node and you will and by measuring the voltage drop of the green edge due to the unit current at this voltage node you are going to measure the susceptibility that's a physical interpretation and so and so so yes so here what I'm plotting are several measurements. So for each node I'm plotting the voltage drop of the green edge due to a unit current there. So here I'm representing as many measurements as number of nodes. So that's one way of measuring. Then there's the second way of measuring which is by adding some noise to the system and just measuring the the the behavior of your your noisy dynamics. From that you can also infer the information of the susceptibility and maybe that's a more more like a uh meaningful way of measuring instead of doing one by one because then you have to do it for every single edge one by one. Uh but that that's basically it. is a measure of voltage drop due to unit currents at different nodes. &gt;&gt; Why does the inverse hessen appear four times? &gt;&gt; Uh yeah, this is this has to do with the mathematical derivation. Uh let me see if I can find uh Oh yes. So well if it's is part of the mathematical formulation. So basically this here's the thing. Uh let me go This is the I want you to f Can you see my mouse? Yes. Okay. Here uh you can see that the physical response is the physical hash inverse times the input current. So that's one physical edge. Now how do you measure the error? Uh the error usually is the response minus what you want squared. So when you measure the the gradient uh what you will have to take the derivative of this quantity with respect to k that is the derivative of the inverse of the physical hession. But when you take the hess the cos hessian what will appear is the derivative of the inverse of the physical hess to the power of two. Turns out that the derivative of the physical the inverse of the physical h is basically the physical h multiplies twice. And so when when you do all the math you will realize that naturally the physical hian inverse is going to appear four times. And by the way, uh I think I I didn't argue why we call it susceptibility. All right. And we call it susceptibility for a very important reason. Uh is because uh the quantity here is I I wrote basically the final expression of this mathematical derivation. But the initial expression of this mathematical derivation is that S is basically the derivative of the physical hash with respect to the conductances. And basically what is telling you that this is measuring how much your response is going to change when you change a little bit the conductances. So it's literally a notion of susceptibility. How susceptible is your response when you tweak certain conductances. And it turns out that the end result of that is this four vectors that appear in here. &gt;&gt; Thank you. That's &gt;&gt; I think it's maybe it's a little bit easier to understand not why there are four powers but why stiff modes of the cos hession are related to soft modes of the physical hessen. Right. If you [clears throat] if you go back to Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. You want to explain that Marcel? &gt;&gt; Uh, sure. &gt;&gt; That picture is &gt;&gt; uh Yeah. So I guess what what you have in mind is uh that the softest modes are the easiest to excite. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Exactly. All right. So um so we found this stiff cost vector in the cost landscape. All right. In this very high dimensional cost landscape. These are the most important parameters. And so what's the meaning of this soft physical vectors? Turns out that your physical response you can decompose it as a linear combination of all the physical vectors. All right? And the magnitude of the value indicates how easy is to activate those vectors. And basically what this is telling me is that the network learned by virtue of the easiest to activate mode. So it didn't it didn't uh it doesn't have to activate the last mode which is the most energetic one. It doesn't has to activate the next one or the next one. It just simply activates the easiest mode, the one with the softest or the smallest physical in value. And that's how these networks learn. They learn by softening. By softening in the right ways, by becoming basically what they actually learn. &gt;&gt; Very cool. Yeah. Like a physical object shaking, the softest thing is going to start vibrating first &gt;&gt; or the the the weakest link in the chain is going to break. Otherwise, it would have been a different chain. Uh, &gt;&gt; and then it's the stiff cough and and these visualizations make it really clear, though there's clearly a lot of math with it, too, that that uh stiff cost is in the gap between the two soft parts. So, it's kind of like a a cake that got um with with a a cut or with a hard chocolate or something like separating two parts that have different resonant modes &gt;&gt; and then protein makes it makes it clear as well like if a lian bound in an amino acid didn't move that non movement couldn't be a difference for making a difference for alostary &gt;&gt; because it wouldn't be responsive. of where something that's that binds to low concent or you know moves a lot with another liant binding it's going to start like a rising tide with the susceptibilities in a ranked way depending on the the modulator. &gt;&gt; Yeah. and and and this is yeah that you're you're correct but and this is surprising this is surprising because this is there are many many solutions there are many configurations that could lead to solving this problem this is only one of them and what we find is that through these learning rules okay we seem to systematically find this kind of solutions in which you soften you actually work by the softest mode uh and that's fascinating, but doesn't have to be the case, right? Uh you could you could make a contrived example in which you function because of the hardest mode of your physical h but that does not appear in any case and and but what's beautiful also is that no matter how it works, this relation holds. No, no matter whether you work by your soft mode which is why what we actually observe or you work by by a very contrived way of working this relation stays the same. This is a very general uh mathematical framework for this double optimization problems. &gt;&gt; Okay, thank you. Lot of lot of other questions. I'll read one from live chat. So Tucker wrote, "Will science build effective proteomic computers using alossteric input output?" Or maybe a kind of more general variant of that that I think arises and you touch upon is what kinds of computational or cognitive systems could be designed with a better grasp of what you're researching. That's a a very speculative question. I I don't know how to answer that. Uh I I think the value of this kind of research is that we can actually understand how they work, how they learn, what the what type of solutions we're getting at. I I I don't know yet where this uh could lead us. I mean that's why we are doing research in the first place. Andrea, I don't know if you want to add something to uh to this question. &gt;&gt; Um uh just to say that probably not for proteins because they're just not big enough to be highly overparameterized to do really complex tasks. So the number of tunable parameters that you have in a protein, well, you have a choice of 20 amino acids at each site in the sequence. So it's determined by the length of the protein. And this is why proteins can be multifunctional. They can have more than one function, but they tend not to have more than that most of them have basically one and some some have a few. You know, they're just not very many that that can solve very complex tasks. So I think the answer for proteins is really no because they also have to fold into their structure. um [clears throat] um you know for the circuits [snorts] um can these ideas help us make better circuits? Yeah, I I think so because um because one of the things it says is that okay, well, if you have an imperfect imperfect circuit, you don't want to tend to have very many high susceptibility edges where it really depends on that edge doing the right thing. And so, you know, low susceptibility solutions might be more robust and um to these sorts of imperfections. And so then this gives a way of perhaps training for lower susceptibility solutions. Mhm. &gt;&gt; A as a biologist, that's really fascinating about enzymes because they have many constraints that they function and evolve under many many cellular constraints and protein production kinds that that aren't necessarily related to their enzyatic function. And they do have they do have a lot of alossteric and and all those kinds of incredible structural events. However, those are like many fingers on the scale of usually several but kind of a core activity even if it's a transcription factor activity or or some epig genomic &gt;&gt; functionality that still can have very complex causal role. But it comes down to kind of like a a train on a track accelerating or decelerating or increasing or decreasing within kind of one constrained mode of action which may be a solution to the evolvability. So then that leads me to to ask like the physical device you were simulating the what what are the like the kind of RAM CPU GPU analogies like does different or improved functionality in the regression task come from more nodes? Is it important to build those systems to have mo different connectivity patterns or like what what physical parameters relate to their ability to perform that regression or how large of a regression could the object that you were working with do? [clears throat] &gt;&gt; Yeah. All right. That's a very good question. I mean there are several aspects to this question like the question of the architecture for example. What is the best architecture for the circuits? Uh I showed you that I show you this picture of the square grid which is basically what we what my colleague built in the in the lab. Uh then I worked out the example of a disorder network. Short answer is that in general like for the most general case the I don't think there is a clear understanding of what the best architecture should be and it's the same problem in artificial neural networks. All right. Um &gt;&gt; well actually for &gt;&gt; that being said for simple for simple networks like linear resistant networks the ones that we have actually uh discussed today there is the best architecture and the best architecture turns out to be a crossbar array that is all the inputs connected to all the outputs that's it with all all wires that's the best you can do in a linear resistive network and and that's al that's that's maybe that's a starting point to start understanding what the best architecture of R. Um uh also we have some general properties uh that we share with artificial neural networks meaning that the more parameters that you have when you are nonlinear the better you are at learning. Okay, that gives you expressivity. If you can tune if you can just tune more knobs that's better but also comes at a price and the price you have to pay well your system is larger learning takes longer. you have to uh spend more energy. So there are these series of trade-offs uh that we have in these physical learning systems um and that we are currently investigating. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Very interesting. It reminds me of the the physical and thermal energetic or other other sources of energy. It's striking that they have that formal relationship to artificial neural networks that you just mentioned. Having a more par if compute were free, having more parameters barring secondary issues learns better or or at least on in certain ways. But then as soon as you start taking different constraints into effect then that's why there is no best model size just even evidenced narrowly by the different numbers of parameters in generative AI families because they kind of cover that spectrum allowing you to say if you have this much compute you need this done at this speed this is the computing cost whereas if you have a a wired ed up physical system. It's using the the constraints of or just the unfolding of physical systems it in this kind of like free compute mode. &gt;&gt; So do they take longer to equilibrate or is it just get into questions of like having a a laboratory or that can measure it or &gt;&gt; No, no, no. I think I think if anything the advantage of having this physical systems is that equilibriates like this. This is an electronic circuit. It is extremely fast. I think um what is uh what is a pity is that for us the theorists it's extremely hard to to model when this circuit gets a little bit more complicated. So but it's just a I think it's a complication for us people doing research on on this on these systems. But the act of physical system equilibriates very quickly. It's it's very very fast and very energy efficient when you compare it to to a to a computer for example. There's one point that I I didn't discuss much which is the topic of learning roles because everything I told you is was regardless of learning role. But the main advantage of this uh of of this kind of object here the experimental object is that all the learning rules are local. That is if you want to update this resistor you only need to know the state of that resistor and nothing else. Whereas if you compare this to gradient and descent on artificial neural networks, each parameter, each edge on your artificial neural network needs to know all the other states of of edges in your network. So you have this gathering of information, okay, that you have to gather at the CPU level and then do the computations and then transfer back to all the edges. That costs a lot of energy. But here everything is decentralized. distributed network and that's a lot of saving even when you scale when you scale up. &gt;&gt; Yeah, a few a few comments on that. That is sometimes a point that the biomimetic or neuromorphic computing communities also discuss or like the NGCLARN biological learning package of professor Aorbia and then also this is more on the computational side. It's something that software packages like RX infer or ultimately just like the graphical models that we're exploring in active inference where there can be node local computation of local message passing and update rules and that constraint or having a procedure that can be locally performed kind of prevents the need for the moving around of information that uh abstract kind of touring vonoman. &gt;&gt; Yep. like server farm with infinite resources metaphor like turning tape with infinite space metaphor kind of has and then and then another I think really striking point to explore is that when it um well first you mentioned free energy so maybe you could give a comment on that but the way that planning works in active inference agents in discrete or in continuous time and in discrete time it's sort of a chess algorithm like research with with secondary branching or secondary evaluations, but kind of like deep policy search uh in that machine learning uh tradition. But then in the continuous time planning setting, it's a tailor expansion. And so then that allows for these different generalized coordinates, different orders or or degrees of expansion of a tailaylor approximation. And then that connects to like hierarchical basian modeling with a tailaylor series expansion. So maybe could you make any other points on the tailaylor series or the free energy and the temperature? &gt;&gt; Uh sure. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Just to just a quick comment basically on your thing about the vonoyman bottleneck. Um yeah so people talk about inmemory compute and our systems are definitely that because the memory is in the resistances in the state of the tunable resistors um which is where the computation is done that right um and but this is also because they're selftuning um by the local rule um it's also inmemory learning &gt;&gt; The tuning is occurring on exactly the objects that are carrying the memory which is the tunable resistors. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Okay. Sorry, go back to that. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um so, [clears throat] so a comment on on the tailor expansion. Yes. So, uh so the talk I explicitly use linear resistor networks. doesn't have to be the case uh just for simplicity but basically what you want are two landscapes I mean that's that's the general description of physical of physical of these physical learning systems and around the minimum of these two landscapes you perform this tailor expansion all right and what we are connecting is this second order description of these two landscapes in different spaces the co hashion and the physical h Now during this talk I use power as the physical landscape. It doesn't have to be power. It could be energy and it could be free energy. All right. Uh you have has to be a or it can be any leap of function to be to be fair. All right. So you have a system that minimizes a leapon function a physical by its own physical dynamics and then you want in addition to tune the parameters such that you minimize a cost. you have that set up and then you can apply all of this reasoning. All right. And the only the and that's those are the only conditions two landscapes you minimize or maximize what these landscapes. Um and you want your system to be continuous meaning that the parameters and the to have this description. the parameters and the physical degrees of freedom like the voltages or the positions of your bits have to be continuous and as soon as you have that you have all these results &gt;&gt; for free well for free you have to do some math but &gt;&gt; but that's it &gt;&gt; thank you I'll ask another question from live chat Bert wrote in mobility corridors and barri barriers are varied for example a navigable river by boat or car Could you capture something like travel modes? &gt;&gt; Can you repeat the question? Sorry. &gt;&gt; In mobility like in in a civic engineering or just physical mobility, corridors and barriers are varied. For example, a navigable river by boat or car. The river is navigable by the boat, not by car. &gt;&gt; Could you capture something like travel modes? I I think that we could capture we can capture with this formalism these travel modes uh for these systems these are station stationary systems that reach steady state uh that's a fixed point okay but we are currently investigating the case in which the steady state the response is not a fixed void but could be a limit cycle so the system in time the response in time is changing and if you do that we Think that if you if you do this tailor approximation of the leap of function that you are actually minimizing then you will obtain the same kind of behavior in which you link the properties of the co and the properties of the hession of this leopon function. Thank you for that comment. It reminds me a lot of the leopon exponents role in chaotic systems and complex systems. and determining divergences. It's it's again a similar nexus with like a laminer flow and then what are the disturbabilities and then I is that steady state just one static approximation or does that steady state have these limit cycle or other kinds of chaotic properties? I I think so for for the circuits in in in question we I I don't think we have observed chaotic properties. I think what we can do are fix points or limit cycles. &gt;&gt; Well, we can tune now more general behaviors. &gt;&gt; Okay. Yeah, we could tune to I mean we can use local rules now to tune limit cycles or or whatever kind of dynamical behavior you want to build in. Um and the nice thing is that these ideas can be generalized. This you know this what Marcelo talked about was all for reciprocal interactions but um the ideas can be generalized for non-rescrocal interactions too. So maybe kind of a a research practical question like what software or methods do you use to design those problems and how do you set out to when you're making it other than for research explorations like how would somebody adapt these methods to a given functionality or they were thinking of or wanting to model. &gt;&gt; Uh so on the on the experimental side, I don't think I can talk that much. I think those ST is building the experiments. I can tell you on the theory side, we have I mean if people want to play with this kind of codes, it's they are fully available. All right. To simulate the learning of these physical systems there there are some GitHub repositories. You can look at the at the two papers. Uh uh this open source paper microscopic imprint of learn solutions in general networks has a link to the to the to a public GitHub repository in which you can play uh with with this with simulating these networks. You can train them to do different things. because you can train them to recognize images uh do amnest uh we also have uh let's see a more powerful um tool now so this is a project I didn't have the time to talk about which is the sec uh the third project noise and nonlinearities in which we basically um endowed this resistor networks this linear resistor networks with noise and nonlinearities is and we devised what we call a restricted curve machine and these are unsupervised unprobabilistic models. This these networks that you can simulate and again you can look at the paper and you will find the GitHub repository public um you can simulate the circuits learning uh unsupervised tasks learning to to to learning the distribution that gets from from some input data. Uh so if people are interested th those are the things and at the level of the more engineering level there are simulations today about the all the actual circuit components I think the software is called spice you can simulate all these kind of uh learning networks it's kind of it's smaller than the effective modeling that we have in our public uh um repositories but it's also a play where you can actually simulate this. At the end of the day, uh there's no black magic in here. It's just electronic components. Cool. Any other comments or anything else you want to share? &gt;&gt; Um Andrea, maybe. Well, maybe just um interest in the biological thing and somebody asked about proteins. Um uh there's another post talk in my group um Farid Muhammad Rafier is looking at uh global epistasis in proteins. So the idea is you know epistasis was where you do mutation A do mutation B and if you do both of them what you get is not the effect on the function is not the same as if you did them each separately and then added them together and in global epistasis these things are correlated um globally you know the non-additivity of the mutations um and um you know what we think this is coming from is from being overparameterized. And so the nice thing about what the susceptibility analysis gives you is that it gives you a way of finding out what are the key amino acids that are that you don't want to mess with if you want to maintain function. Those are the key edges that Marcelo is talking about. uh without doing things like deep mutational scans and stuff like that, you can get it just from the physical properties of the protein itself. &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; Wow. What's what's very fascinating about that is I'm thinking about a protein physical epistasis or alter case with like vi physics quote physically transferred vibrational on molecule modes. Then I'm thinking about other multiomix data sets like gene expression and genome variation for like a G-W was. So both of those &gt;&gt; we might make networks that have additivity like super or sublinear additivity aka epistasis. So we have statistical epistasis in quantitative genetics, G-W was gene expression. So it just again it's that striking parallel that there's a similar susceptibility framework for thinking about the abstract quote non-physical like a G-W was or a co-expression network and two LOSI being co-expressed up and down across tissues. It doesn't mean that they physically interact or that changing one changes the other. So there's all these different networks and they they and then by overlaying them it'd be like okay so what transcript levels or there could be things that would be biologically relevant with with the transcript level could be very sensitive to phenotype or not and they all kind of project down to to the biological system being what it is with the phenotype a as that kind of um single register for all of those statistical susceptibilities. So single omic analyses can tell part of the story, but then they're only part of the the and some of that we get revealed by a single molecule protein. Other other epistases don't get revealed at that at that scale. So it's like it brings a lot of unity to how those different data sets even the past ones that were single omic still have some degrees of variability reflected but it was just one experiment so it didn't pin down every axis of variability. &gt;&gt; Right. But this is where the susceptibility analysis could be really useful. Mhm. [clears throat] &gt;&gt; Cool. Any last comments, Marcelo, or what are your next research slashphysical steps? &gt;&gt; Yeah. All right. I Well, I'm very biased. I always say this, but I find this topic fascinating because I truly think that this could be a very tool and framework to understand more biological systems. Um I'm my next steps career-wise I'm moving to the ENS in Paris. I want to continue doing research on physical learning also moving a little bit closer to biological systems. Uh and just I I think there is a lot of things to do about how physical constraints actually shape the learning of real systems embedded in the real world unlike un like virtual systems that in which you're free to do anything you want. Here we have rules, we have constraints. How do these constraints affect the learning of actual physical systems and biological systems? I think these are just fundamental questions and now luckily physicists are just turning their attention to these kind of problems. Uh so that's it. I encourage a lot of people doing this like reading this kind of of papers and and just contacting us because I think this is this is truly fascinating. Awesome. Andrea, any last comment? All right, thank you both. Good luck with your research. Bye. &gt;&gt; Right. &gt;&gt; All right. Thank you, Daniel. &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; it does, right? &gt;&gt; [laughter]