ActInf GuestStream 112.1 ~ Brain-like variational inference (Hadi Vafaii)

> Source: YouTube
> Playlist: GuestStreams
> Duration: 1:28:08 | Uploaded: Unknown
> Transcript method: auto_caption

Hello, welcome everyone. It is June 25th, 2025. We are in active inference gueststream 112.1 brainike variational inference with Hadi Fifi. And I looked and found that actually model stream 11.1 when we discussed Pson variational autoenccoder was on June 26th, 2024. So just kind of funny that it's like exactly 1 year or all but a day away from a year. So, it's awesome to check back in with you and hear these research updates. So, thanks again for joining and looking forward to the presentation. All right, awesome. Thanks, Daniel, for the invitation. I had a great time last time when I presented and um I hope we can have fun this time again. All right, so so the the work that Daniel mentioned, the Panag, it's I think this one. So, you can check it out. It's uh from last year and uh it it is published in uh NERIPS last year and this is the new preprint brain like variational inference which we're going to talk about today and that's a work uh in collaboration with Decal who's a EXPS PhD student um in Berkeley and uh Jake who's my uh postto mentor all right but you know in the title there's like several words brain-like variational inference and I hope that I can um communicate what each of these words mean to you by the end of this talk and let's first start by inference. What is inference? It's understanding the world. So our brains receive sensory information from the world out there and we have to make sense of the state of the world. We have to understand how the world is right now so that we can act in it and survive. And in fact this is the topic of a new blog post that I have written. I I'm going to plug it here. Um so this blog post is coming soon. It's probably like in a week um on my website mysterioustune.com. Um and inference is you know I claim that it's your brain trying to guess the hidden cause of its observations. And you know to just drive this point home I I have I give you three very concrete examples each more difficult than the other. For example if you go outside and see there is extensive wetness of the ground you might guess that you know there there was rain last night. So the cause of what you observe which is wet ground was rain. So that's inference. You're actually doing inference when you reach that conclusion which is a very simple kind of inference. Also um I uh discuss this problem of degeneracy in visual perception. Uh when you see a circular shape it could be a 2D circle you know held perfectly perpendicular to your direction of gaze or it could be actually a 3D sphere. And um you know intuitively you might think that it's most likely a sphere but how where does that come from? That's your prior knowledge. So um having lived in this world we have seen more spheres than circles. Therefore you might actually intuitively think that what you're seeing is actually a sphere. And um last one is the most difficult um nearly impossible type of inference is the social inference. So when when some somebody says something to you, you want to understand what they actually meant and um that is also uh can be understood as an instance of inference. Um in linguistics this is technically called pragmatics, but I claim and um develop an argument that all of these examples are um you're basically performing inference. And so I'm going to post this um blog post in like a week or so. And um you can either subscribe to the to the website or follow me on social media like Twitter and LinkedIn. I'm going to post it there too. Um here's another example from the blog post. Um most of us here probably are familiar with this allegory of the cave. So Plato argued that being alive is just like you know being prisoners in the back of a cave. You know you're separated from the real world out there. This is the real world. You don't really have access to it. But you see shadows from the real world projected on the wall that you have access to. And you know when you see those shadows or observations, you perform inference to understand the likely causes that um caused those observations. Well, in the case of vision, those shadows are probably just like, you know, the you can think of them as photons originating from real objects out there. And it's your brain's job to interpret those photons and build a 3D model of the world from that. And that can be understood as uh Beijian inference. And this is an idea that um famously Hel says perception as unconscious inference. You know, it's it's the same idea. You know, people um since 380 BC have been thinking about it and we are still thinking about it. You know, that's that's what inference is. It's a very broad thing that we have to understand. But uh the point of the paper is that okay this is inference and this is a very um let's say a big challenge that we have to deal with in our lives and how does brain do it like can how can you get um a brain-like inference algorithm um especially from first principles. So that's the idea. We want to derive a brain-like inference algorithm from first principles you know because we want to understand how does the brain perform this inference al you know inference um task. Okay that's the idea. So just to summarize what is in the paper um we start from this unifying principle of variational free energy minimization which is in you know machine learning people more commonly uh refer to free energy as evidence lowerbound or elbow but it's the same thing and we're going to use that unifying principle to derive different inference algorithms as instances of free energy minimization. And this paper really is like a um half synthesis review and half new algorithm. For the synthesis part, we're going to show that variational autoenccoders uh predictive coding and sparse coding are all instances of free energy And then we use that uh insight to derive new architecture which is the iterative plus on DAE um just by starting from free energy minimization. So that's a kind of a top- down derivation of an algorithm. We don't put anything there by hand. We just say like look, we accept free energy minimization as our principle and then we add some other assumptions to it to derive this algorithm. And I'm I'm going to be explicit about all those assumptions. Cuz you like this bit better. Okay. All right. Um so when we derive this algorithm we also test uh whether it has any empirical benefits because of course you know it's it's very cool and it's very theory driven but um we are also interested in empirical benefits um and and we explore convergence properties sparity reconstruction trade-off and out of domain generalization um and and you know I'm going to explain why each of these empirical benefits are are interesting or important uh when we get to that result but this is just the summary of of the empirical results. Okay. Now let's just talk about um basian posterior inference. Um so probably most of you are just familiar. This is just a baze rule. Um what we have on the left hand side is the posterior. Uh if you remember from the previous examples you could imagine like x are the observations. This this could be just an image like a retinal pattern of photon whatever that you receive and you want to infer what are the causes. Z are the causes. So you want to compute this probability distribution. what is the likelihood of certain cog z given that I have observed certain uh observation x right and b tells us you can compute it by um dividing this likelihood times prior with the marginal distribution so this is fairly standard stuff so I'm not going to linger too much here and probably there are many interesting videos on this you know this YouTube channel that you can find to that explains this idea um so I'm going to move on uh but the point I want to make here is that if you want to compute this posterior distribution exactly you have to go through this computing this integral which is I just express this marginal distribution as an integral over all the possible causes uh where this is just um you know the joint distribution broken into this kind of structure um and you know this is very very difficult to compute first of all most um in most cases there's no closed form solution except you Like if you have a very simple Gaussian distribution for prior and likelihood then maybe you can compute this but in most real world cases you don't have access to that you know close form solution and also it's it's it's computationally hard to um approximate as well like you have to go through all the possible latent configurations add them up you know to to compute this therefore what I want to you to um remember from this part is that you know posterior inference actually is a difficult uh task computationally Therefore, people have come up with approximate u methods and one of them is variational inference. So you introduce some distribution Q and you call this approximate posterior or variational posterior and then you want to um you want to use Q to approximate the actual you know true posterior or optimal posterior. How do you do it? By minimizing the callback liler divergence between Q and P. And this is just a very standard test textbook level, you know, introduction to to variational inference. And again, I'm not going to spend too much time. Uh this is just very um standard stuff. Um and and here's another uh this is the main equation that we're going to work with. And I think this is very important. Therefore, I want to make sure that we'll understand like every detail here. Um in the paper in the appendix, we derived this equation. So um if you think if you haven't seen this before, this is a very standard result in variational inference. Uh and you can see the paper appendix for a derivation. Um but here let's just take this equation as given. It's it's not a very complicated derivation. It's a very straightforward one. Uh but it it's true. This equation holds for any distribution Q that you know that is a dist that is a proper uh density. Um so let's let's actually try to understand what this is. Okay, on the left hand side we have the log of the marginal uh p theta of x and then we have this object here which is an expectation over you know samples drawn from the approximate posterior and this log ratio of the joint distribution divided by the approximate posterior and then this thing is what we actually want to minimize to find our um you know best approximate posterior and once One thing I I want to mention here is that if you notice I have like these colorcoded um things. So um in this presentation and also in the paper I'm using red to um to indicate the uh inference components of the model and blue to indicate the generative model uh components. And you know you can think of the blue parameters as just you know theta as parameters of the neural network that you you know for the generative model. Um or if you believe that the brain has a generative model of the world, you can think of theta as the synaptic weights uh of the connections between neurons and fi are just parameters that you have to optimize to find the best Q. And and for example, a very standard example here is that if you have a variational autoenccoder, PI and theta are just both neural networks. And um specifically you have for example uh Q can be understood as a neural network that takes any input X and outputs the parameters that define this distribution. Like for example if five are neural network parameters you apply that to X to get back the mean and variance of a gausian if you think Q should be a gausian. Okay. So but why why is this equation interesting? Um uh let me actually just show you this visualization because I think this helps us remember. So I told you this is model evidence. So um that's evidence. You have evidence lower bound or elbow and then the KL divergence. So evidence plus elbow is KL. Okay. And and why is this equation interesting to us? Because we're interested in inference. Um I want you to take a look at the both left hand side and right hand side of this equation. If you notice there are no red parameters on the left hand side. So you know um the right hand side is the only part of this equation that depends on those red uh variational parameters fi right. Therefore, uh, intuitively, if you want to minimize the KL, that's our goal. We defined good inference like, um, you know, faithful inference as just, um, a Q that is close enough to P and, um, and and we define that as, as, you know, a Q that minimizes the KL. So minimizing this KL term on the right hand side directly is going to maximize elbow because the left hand side doesn't depend on phi or if you want to see like in algebraic form you can just say if you compute the derivative of this whole equation with respect to phi this is going to vanish there's no phi here is going to have 0 equals gradient of this elbow with respect to phi plus gradient of kl with respect to phi therefore another way to see how minimum imizing KL is exactly equivalent to maximizing elbow and and this is the the the whole idea behind you know maximizing elbow to do inference which is you know elbow is just negative free energy so that's that's kind of one way of thinking about free energy principle okay so so this is a very important equation I just wanted to spend quite some time here um and and if there's any questions maybe um we can actually turn this into a kind of a discussion rather than like keeping it to the end. Um and you know I have happy to answer questions if there are any. All right. Now that we defined elbow and we we know its utility, you know, we are maximizing elbow because we're interested in inference. Let's actually just see what elbow looks like if we if we expand it. Right? This is the definition. And um one way to carve up the elbow is this is the joint distribution p theta x and z. You can easily see that it can be broken into P theta of X given Z. That's what this term is. And then uh plus P theta of Z. And again if you just um invert kind of the the denominator and denominator it turns out that this just looks like another KL term which is very this is different KL from the the previous one. The previous one was between approximate posterior and the true posterior. This is between approximate posterior and the prior. just an important uh distinction and and there's you know different ways to interpret this. This is just a reconstruction term um which says if you go from the latent cause and reconstruct your observation um under your uh posterior this should have high likelihood. That's the intuition for that. And this just ter you know it appears from the math and the interpretation is that you know you you don't want to deviate too much from your prior. This is a penalty. This is a regularization penalty that um says reconstruct your your your input as as good as possible while not deviating too much from your prior. And and this has um a theoretical analog in uh information theory where you can think of this term as distortion. The other term is rate and um Alex LM has a really nice paper where where they um make this rigorous. Okay, so this is so far all of this is just standard you know VAE kind of uh theory, right? There's there's nothing new so far. Uh but I want to I want to highlight um you know if you have if if you want to define this elbow you have to you know uh make decisions about three distinct distributions. The first one is of course the approximate posterior. uh you have to choose what what form it has like it could be gausian it could be posson like our posan v paper from last year and the likelihood also is a distribution you have to you know choose what it is and the prior as well so there are three independent you know choices you have to make and here's a synthesis part of the paper that we just say that look and this is not new not all of this is known um but we're just putting it nicely in in a figure right uh we're saying look variational free energy minimization unifies all of these different models across you know neuroscience and machine learning and and this is the kind of a taxonomy model tree that comes out of that. So you have to first choose a prior um let's say you choose Gausian okay and then the next decision you're faced with is what is your approximate posterior if you choose direct delta you actually recover predictive coding and this you know if you want to uh I think there's there's a video uh on this channel that um goes through Baron Millage review paper where they discuss this um derivation so it's it's not it's not new um but if you choose approximate posterior to be Gaussian then you have to also choose what your encoder is right so if you choose um a neural network that takes any image X and spits out the parameters like you know it's a gausian so you need to give me uh in order to construct this Q you have to give me like what is the mean and what is the variance if you have a neural network that produces those for you you just recover variational autoenccoders um king and bellon uh but if you if you just don't do that If you do a iterative inference procedure more like you know neuroscience uh approaches like predictive coding then you have iterative gausing va which is just a model we introduce in this paper and and it's yes could I ask a few questions on this slide yes go ahead awesome okay so you have the prior can be panon gaussian or lelause form so what other edges could be coming out of the prior or why would somebody select one of those three forms that you have listed here. Okay. Yeah, I think this is not you know definitely there are many more priors that you can choose from. Um you know there are other papers in the literature that you can for example you can choose a student t distribution for your prior if you have if you think that your prior should be heavy tailed and and certainly there are other examples uh other than these three. I'm just here using these three to illustrate how different models uh that that in in the leaves of this tree can be um unified through this unifying picture and and you're right like what what really um like why would you choose poson instead of gausian for example that's our paper from last year you would choose posson because if you want your model to have representations that are more brainlike um we know that brain brain neurons in the brain, they don't have continuous um unsigned uh activations. They have they they communicate through action potentials or spikes and and panon is one way to model that. Um or in the case of sparse coding, the prior is chosen to be lost because it has this like sparity inducing property. Um so because you might think that look my neurons neurons in the brain, we have observed that they're very sparsely active. Therefore, loss is a better choice than gaussian that that kind of that's the reasoning that could go uh possible types of reasoning that could go into your choices. Cool. And then one more and you may go into this more. How is iterative different than iteratively applying amortized inference? Uh it's a very good question. I think um here what I mean by iterative is that you don't have any neural networks. There's no free parameters that you train for your encoder. that's like fully iterative. However, there are iterative amortized hybrid models such as one from uh Joseph Marino from 2018 where they actually do exactly what you suggested. They have they iteratively apply um some there's some amortized neural network that produces um parameters of your of your distribution. there's another auxiliary network that produces I think the the gradients um I don't I don't exactly remember but they they also had this auxilary network was a pretty complicated algorithm but um but you're right that you know there might be um hybrid cases where you have iterative iteratively applied amortized neural networks um to to get to the you know final posterior which by the way in the appendix of the paper uh so so This paper is like I don't know like 64 pages and we wanted to make it self-contained. So the the appendix actually contains all sorts of you know u background information and review of all these like existing iterative amatize hybrid derative amortize all all of that is in the paper so you can take a look there if you're curious. Um I I just want to mention one thing here is that um I didn't know about this derivation like you know actually like deriving sparse coding as LLAS plus direct delta um posterior um I gave this talk here at the Redwood Center for theoretical neuroscience and Bruno Olsen uh this same olden as here he was like okay yeah this is cute but I I did this derivation back in 96 I'll send it to you. So he sent me this paper. It's not even a paper. It's just a technical report. It's like five pages. He was inspired by Peter Dian's uh Helmo's machine. Um and then he said, "Okay, yeah, you can actually derive sparse coding through this." Uh and I think it's it's a pretty interesting paper, but it's it's missing from the literature. So I hope that this uh citation will um you know, help fix that kind of like it's it's every time you site like direct direct delta posterior with Gausian can give you like can give you predictive coding from free energy minimization. You can also site this sparse coding which is like parallels that but it's from 96. So it was a pretty interesting revelation for me. All right. Um the last one is like if you choose posson for both prior and approximate posterior and choose amvertise you get the PVA paper which is from the last year and now we just replace the encoder with an iterative uh procedure and we get iterative pulse on VA and we're going to discuss why iterative is like a little more brain like than amortize and what are the empirical benefits and all of that. Um but yeah the whole point of this figure is that you know really you can embrace free energy minimization as just one principle that can give you all sorts of various algorithms and and and also we um use this to just say like you you know there's there's all sorts of possibilities and you just make different choices and you get wildly different algorithms. So there's there's a lot more left to explore here. That's the one of the points. Just one short comment on the distributions that you have here. Pan is waiting time. So it's always a positive number like how much time until the next bus appears. The appearance of the bus is like the DRock delta because it's a spike event and then wait no no no I I wouldn't say Pson is waiting time. I think Pson uh you can actually construct a pson process from those waiting times that are exponentially distributed and and Pson is the event count for a finite observation window. Thank you for the clarification. And then Gaus in is just sort of the um the the mother distribution or the the the sort of central limit theorem type large number convergence. So it's helpful well behaved in a lot of ways. But this is sort of like events and their waiting time relationships, right? Exactly. Like you're saying look gausian. But by the way I one thing I forgot to mention uh from previous slide I I said there are three distributions but right now I in this figure I have only prior and approximate posterior because the reason for that is for literally all of these models uh the the likelihood the the last third distribution is always gausian in even in the posson cases. So, and I think I also like the idea of thinking about uh the central limit theorem that that could be like used to justify why your observations um can be gausian distributed. Um and and yeah, I I I guess that's it, right? You know, you just think about your problem like whatever you want to model. Um, in our case, we want to model neural activity. And you know, Gausian seems less biologically plausible than integer spy counts. But we're not saying that integer spike counts is actually literally what the brain is doing. We're just saying that relative to Gausian, it's a better choice which reflects that, you know, discrete um eventbased signaling that is ongoing in the brain. That's the idea. Okay. All right. So in the paper we also talk about prescriptive theories. Uh I want to just use this opportunity to to uh clarify what we mean by prescriptive. This is just something that comes from uh physics inspiration. So um another thing that we're interested in is that you know uh as when we go through the paper I'm going to I'm going to talk about inference which is a computation and dynamics interchangeably. Like I'm saying like look uh and this is like if not you know we didn't come up with this there's a fristen paper like a you know free energy principle process theory where they say like neural activity dynamics can be understood as they're just minimizing free energy. So so we're interested in dynamics we're interesting in deriving dynamical equations uh for neurons and um that's where this dynamics comes from. But but what is the physics inspiration here? So in physics you don't really put terms by hand like if you want to come up with a dynamical equation that describes a physical system you usually don't you know u and for example in in um effective field theory um you start from the principle of least action and then the prescription here is that you just look at the symmetries uh that your system has to satisfy and that fully dictates the entire lrangeian that you plug in to this um action equation and you can derive the dynamics from there. Um so so this is pretty elegant, right? You don't you don't put in terms by hand. You just derive it from a top- down approach. You just say like here's my my symmetries and and it fully determines um what your like branching should be. Of course, you know, we don't have this much elegance in in the messy world of Nur AI, but we can do something roughly similar. So we're we're saying look in our case our principle is free energy minimization. So we're saying this this object free energy is is just you have to construct it and you have to minimize it. That's going to give you the dynamics. And then the prescription is the kind of the important part. Um in the paper we say like if you choose these three things uh poson distributions for your posterior and online inference and natural gradient descent on free energy you can derive the architecture iterative pos which which is a spiking recurren neural network with stoastic leaky integrated fire neurons and level competition and you know I'll I'll I'll describe what any of all of these mean um it's just um it's just a framing like we we don't um we we derive these things from from top down principles. That's kind of the emphasis here. And um before going to actually like show you the paper and the derivations and the results, I want to show you something very gimmicky that I I quite like. So I don't know for for those of you from from neuroscience background you might have seen those videos of hubil and visasel you know showing a bar of light to an anesthetized cat and then recording from the cat's visual cortex and then there's like these these noises that you can hear like that the neur neurons are being activated by that bar of light. So what I'm going to show you here is a replication of those experiments but from just a model neuron and this neuron never saw neural activity like never saw data from actual neurons. What it did just like we derived this um the algorithm from first principles and we trained it on natural image patches and then for example here you see that in the top right um it it learns receptive fields that look like gabbors which is what you would observe if you stick an electrod um to like a primate visual cortex. Um, and what I'm going to do is I'm going to just slide this bar of light, the red bar here, uh, across that receptive field. And I'm going to here plot the firing rate of this neuron in response to that. So the y-axis is firing rate and also the sample spike counts. It's a stochastic spiking model. And x is time index. Let's see if you can hear it. One more time. All right. So, I'm really excited about this because, you know, this just uh there's no activity. There was just, you know, just this algorithm was derived from from just equations from top down. You know, that's that's what excites me about that. But anyway, here is where I switched to paper PDF. Um, and I'm going to walk you through the derivations there. uh because I think the paper is written uh and it you know decently uh well um so it's easy to understand let's do that and you see it okay um yeah so it's the intro let's just skip that um and and by the way you can think of this as I'm going through the PDF you can think of this as just you know um a step-by-step guideline if you wanted to read this paper on your own this I think how you should do it. So okay here you notice the notation um we have this generative model uh defined here and again the color coding generative and and inference are always blue and red and then we start from the main equation and of course I have lots of citations to the appendix here uh where I provide all the necessary information you don't you don't need to read anything else just the appendix uh for example here um just very quickly this is the perceptionist inference more like a philosophical and historical background. Here I define what is Beijian posterior inference and why is it difficult um and this is this equation is where I derive that elbow uh equation that I had on the slides. So it's um it's very um I think intuitive as if you if you read it you'll see and then here I say okay you need three distributions for the elbow and then the rest is just like carving up the elbow you know gausian VAE what is it um how do you exactly define a gausian VAE and then going to pan which is our work from last year here I discuss amortize versus iterative inference and so on and then this is my you know pedagogical like intuitive derivation of a linear predictive coding which of course the more complete uh version is in in this millillage uh review you can check it out but yeah um and then finally uh this is like a summary of the models in this paper and also else from elsewhere in this table and yeah so back so so appendix A is just an extended background and um that's all you need to know to be able to understand this paper. But back to this. Okay, now we're back at the main main paper um background section. Uh okay as you discussed you start from elbow and then you recognize that maximizing elbow is equivalent to minimizing this KL term which is in our case um which means you know you enhance the quality of posterior inference by maximizing elbow or minimizing free energy which is exactly negative elbow. So that's the key uh insight here that you know you can connect theoretical neuroscience to machine learning by recognizing f is just negative elbow. Next again just just to remind you we have these three distributions we have to choose and also the next choice we have to make is um the the inference method is it amortized or is it um then we introduce VAE sparse coding and and predictive coding as variational inference. same figure as you just saw. And importantly, um I I put this derivation of the dynamics of a predictive coding model because I'm going to compare our result to this. And we're going to find that in our case, we get something a little more biologically plausible than this standard predictive coding dynamics. And I guess there's there's no time for me to really go through this. This is a very standard result. it's you know it's an original row ballot paper or any review papers that that came after that. Um therefore let's just keep this in mind. And this is just the dynamics you derive from standard predictive coding with Gausian assumptions. And we're going to you know when we derive our own iterative poson v dynamics we're going to come back and and and compare to this. Okay. So um yeah here I I think there's um several papers that we mentioned here in this paragraph that are I think super cool and interesting. So um if you're interested you should check them out. This paper is is is fascinating. Beijian learning rule uh it was published I think a couple years ago and they basically say that you know you can um any learning algorithm that has been successful like including I don't know um Adam dropout whatever SGD you can actually uh cast them as instances of variational inference so they start from a variational objective and then they show that if you just swap you know you you choose your approximate posterior in different ways and then you make some additional uh uh like approximation assumptions and look elsewhere. Um and then you apply natural gradient descent on that variational objective to derive many many different learning rules as instances of variational inference. So this this is kind of this paper shows um the unification potential of variational inference in more like a optimization machine learning uh type of land. Um so you should check it out. It's very interesting. Um and then later building on DLR, this is a paper Jones Atal. It's a Kevin Murphy paper. They introduce Beijian online natural gradient. They just say like if you want to do online inference, you should do it using natural gradient descent on the variational objective. Um which is exactly the same prescription following PLR. They also do natural gradient descent. And and just briefly, why natural gradient descent? Because um you know when we when we are optimizing the posterior the posterior is a probability distribution. It has its parameters are um you know they don't live in uklidian space. There's an intrinsic geometry induced by the fissure metric and if you don't respect that geometry you're going to perform poorly. That's the intuition which if you're interested you can actually like there's a bunch of citations in the paper that you can go dig deeper. Um but following these two uh very inspiring papers Bong and DLR here is where we oh sorry where we introduce our fond framework. So what does it stand for? It's free energy online natural gradient dynamics. So we're interested in dynamics neural dynamics. That's why we emphasize dynamics. But you know u that's our framework. We we're saying look if you want to derive dynamics you know uh from first principles just start from free energy minimization and then um first you have to identify the dynamical variables like what are the things you're optimizing what are the what how do you parameterize your posterior that's first choice you make and then the temporal evolution of your posterior parameters is fully determined by natural gradient descent on variational free energy that is our prescription which will become concrete as we go through the paper. And and finally, we also embrace this online update scheme um because that's how brain performs inference, right? Um just to give you an intuition what online means here. Um so, so in most machine learning cases, you have one one single image, right? And you perform inference on that single image to find the posterior uh for that, right? But in reality, the brain doesn't have like a a prior that is fixed in the past and it never changes and you always like have images that you have to perform inference. In in biological systems, online inference makes a little more sense um to to modeling how brains perform inference. And online means that your prior constantly gets updated as time goes on. So you always have a a moving prior that is being updated. And um if you perform inference like let's say you have a movie and there's a a new frame comes in you perform inference you get to the posterior and that posterior at time t becomes the prior at time t + one. That's what it means to have online updated scheme. And I'll let me just show you the figure real quick. So if you start the these red curve is just you know how your posterior distribution is getting uh evolved in time. Every single point on along this curve is a posterior distribution. And in the static inference you have like one prior that is fixed in the distant past t= 0 and you evolve in time. You always compare back to that prior. But in online inference your post your prior itself gets updated and you have always you compare your posterior at t to the prior from the previous time point which is also what bong does. All right. Um that's it. So we're going to use we're going to apply these prescriptions and we're going to derive a bunch of different VAE models including the iterative posan one that is um is going to give us interesting theoretical and empirical results. Um so let's go through that real quick. Um okay the first step we have to choose the distributions right and as I mentioned earlier when we were talking about that uh you know the the the model tree uh slide we choose pson because that's a better approximation for like brain like integer valued spike count representations at least compared to gausian poson is a little more brainlike but here in appendix B1 we discussed that you know we're not saying that the brain is literally pulse on. We're saying it's just a better approximation um relative to Gausian. And then for the likelihood, this is what we go with. This is just simple Gausian with a linear decoder. So you go from latent observation latent cause Z. So in our case these are just spike counts and you multiply this linear decoder layer fi um to that to get to the mean of the gausian with some fixed variance. This is like the simplest possible case uh that we go with in this like main paper but um we extend that to more complicated cases in the appendix including a nonlinear decoder and this fi is actually called dictionary in sparse coding literature. So it's the same thing as a dictionary. Okay. So now let's talk about the prescriptive choices like you know to to derive dynamics from first principles. Um we have to choose we have to address two questions two additional questions. What are the dynamical variables and what equations govern their time um evolution? And in appendix B2 I I connect this again back to physics um uh through this like prescriptive theories in in physics. Um for so okay first question what are the dynamical variables? So for for posson the only par you know the only parameter you have to give me so that I can construct a pro you know a posson distribution is the rate parameter the firing rate but that's a positive value and and the rate parameter itself is very hard to optimize. Um therefore we're going to make the following choice. So we're going to say look we're going to start with these real valued vector U which is K is the number of neurons and you have um U is you know some real number and if you exponentiate U you're going to get the firing rates and you're going to be able to construct uh poson distribution from those firing rates and and this makes it easier because you know u is um is a real number you don't have to do constraint optimization you can just you know do natural gradient descent on on free energy without having to constrain your gradients so that it remains always positive. That's like a pragmatic like a mathematical convenience but also this is not too biologically implausible because you can actually interpret you as membrane potentials. So in you know from neuroscience we know that neurons have this like local private signal to them. There's their membrane potential that fluctuates, goes up and down and then if it reaches certain threshold, neurons emit an action potential or a spike. And there's some work that shows that you can actually model that relationship between the membrane potential and the firing rate through you know expansive nonlinearities like like power laws or exponential. Um so that's that's basically two reasons why we chose this parameterization mathematical convenience and it's not biologically too implausible and once you choose that you have to um you know you can just derive the dynamics um through natural gradient descent on variational free energy that's what we're going to do next. Okay. Um so this equation shows if you take negative elbow with the assumptions that we discussed above and construct your free energy this is how it's going to look like for pson. So first of all this reconstruction term is kind of familiar right you have this mean squared error that appears because you chose gausian for your likelihood. So this this part should be familiar for all of us. Um if you've seen like you know predictive coding or or variational order encoders this part kind of might look new to you because this this is the kale term between the approximate posterior and the prior and for for for distribution parameterized in its canonical form which is like the the log rate um parameterization it's going to look like this. I mean uh it's it's fine if you don't really understand this equation uh right now. Um uh just know that there's a derivation over here appendix B3 where I just you know start from the pulson distribution and derive this this kale term. So if you're curious you can check it out there. Uh what we're going to do is now we're going to differentiate this f because we want to derive our dynamics um for the membrane potentials u. Okay. Um the first thing is let's focus on this reconstruction term here. So this is an expectation. We want to differentiate we want to compute this right? We want to compute the gradient of f with respect to u because we have u dot equals this is our prescription. So I I I told you in in words but in equations it's just you know the the rate of change of your approximate posterior parameters u is going to be given by the inverse fissure metric. This is just the fissure preconditioning. That's what natural gradient descent means. And the actual gradient of free energy with respect to u. So we're going to forget about this for now. Our focus is to compute this quantity. Okay. Gradient u of f and f has two terms. This is the reconstruction term. This is the kale term. And we're going to do that derivation right now. So first off gradient of this term with respect to u. Okay. Um, yeah, this is a little bit difficult because first of all, the U dependence appears here in the expectation, right? Let me clean this a little bit. And you see that this the whatever is inside here does not depend on you. It's only in the expectation. So, we have to also make another approximation here. And the standard approximation is that you just take a single sample. You draw a single sample from the posterior. And that sample importantly is going to depend on the parameter U. And this sample of course because Q is a plus distribution. This is just an integer spike count. So it's a bunch of integers, right? And you plug that in and then you say that oh this is my approximation of the reconstruction term. Now let's actually compute the gradient of this instead of that expectation. It's technically just a single Monte Carlo sample and and then once you do that um you recognize that you know the chain of dependence here is that first of all you have u uh which is the log rate you exponentiate it to get to the rate and then you draw a sample to get to this spider count sample and then you have uh this reconstruction term as a function of that z. So we have to apply the chain rule several times to actually compute that gradient. So gradient u of uh reconstruction term is these things um um you know you have to compute like three different gradients and here the gradient of reconstruction term with respect to z is pretty simple you know it's just going to look like this you know it's um 5 transpose  x - 5 z you know it's very standard um we're going to leave partial Z to partial R. We're going we're going to use the straight through approximation to to just say that this is this is going to be one. And then the partial of R with respect to U is just you know e to the U because R is X of U. So if you differentiate R with respect to U, you end up with the same thing. It's just an exponential. So with these approximations, the net result is that we have this expression for gradient of the reconstruction term. And now let's go back um and look at the KL term. It's it's this one is actually a lot easier. You want to compute the gradient of this thing with respect to U. And it's very easy to see that I'm not going to do it, but it's very easy to see that this is actually the final result. So you have e to the u  u minus u0 and you know u is your posterior membrane potential u u kn is your prior because of this blue. So if you just compine com combine this um reconstruction gradient with the kl gradient you end up with this expression. Now, now we have the gradient of free energy with respect to u and then the last step is to apply this fisser preconditioning. Again in appendix B4 I do the derivation and it turns out if you if you parameterize a poson distribution in its canonical log rate uh form the fissure metric is actually just e to the u that's just your rate and it amazingly cancels out this e to the u that appeared here and you end up with this final equation. Okay. So, I I know that I was like being a little fast, but I just wanted to go through that real quick so that I can I can just, you know, interpret the final result. Okay. Um, U dot is how your membrane potential changes in time to minimize free energy. That's because we that's, you know, how we define our dynamics. And whatever appears on the right hand side is just that's what the math gave us like the free energy expression for panon distributions and all the other approximations we we made like the Monte Carlo sample what whatever if you do all of those you end up with this these terms and and I want to emphasize we didn't put any of these in there by hand it just it was given to us by the mathematics of uh the free energy with poson assumptions but now we're going to interpret those terms So what appears here is that there's this phrpose Xi was you know was our dictionary element this the transpose of our decoder and you can think of this as a feed forward drive because this says look if you have this image X multiply it with this like receptive field quote unquote and then this is going to tell you how much your membrane potential should increase given that image X and then this other term appears that has this like kind of recurrent term And it also importantly applies to the spiking activity from other neurons. It says how much your um your membrane potential should drop as a function of how much you um influence you receive from other neurons. And finally, there's this other homeostatic leak term that says, you know, you just prior membrane potential. That's what this term is. And um you know there's an appendix one of these appendices uh yeah B5 where I go through like explaining why we interpret these terms with these you know phrases like feed forward drive recurrent explaining away there's there's a little bit of discussion there what I want to emphasize here is that first of all this format of the the recurrent dynamics equation that that we ended up deriving from first principles this is not new this has been studied from since at least 1970s. There's a paper from Sunni Amari from like 72 or something where he explores u properties of these types of equations and and this kind of you can think of this as a canonical circuit model that different people have studied. Um but interestingly in our case it just popped out of the math. We didn't put it any of these terms by hand. That's what I want to emphasize here. Um so that's one thing that's uh pretty interesting. Another thing I want to emphasize is if you remember I I told you the predictive coding equation has certain limitations in terms of biological plausibility that uh this equation doesn't. Let me emphasize that now. So this is just you know standard predictive coding dynamics. So u mu dot is mu is just a another real variable that you know you can plausibly interpret as membrane potential and in predictive coding you also get this feed forward drive and leak term and lateral connections term you get all of them there's there's one important difference here the influence of other neurons goes you know the if you interpret mu as membrane potential these neurons through these lateral uh like recurrent connection influence each other through their membrane potentials. And we we know that that's biologically not plausible because membrane potential of a neuron is a private signal to that neuron. You cannot expect that other neurons in your vicinity to be able to directly be influenced by your membrane whatever your membrane potential value is. More more biologically plausible is that you know you receive influence from your neighboring neurons through their spiking activity. So remember this and now let's go back to our equation whatever we get for poson iterative pos this is what we get so the the recurrent in influence comes through spiking activity and I think that's uh that's a very interesting um more biologically plausible outcome that I wanted to highlight. So you when when when you um let's say like when you influence your neighboring neurons through this recurrent term, it it happens through your spiking activity, not directly through your membrane potential. Yeah. Uh I guess here next we just go from you know continuous time to discrete time because we want to implement this. So that's what you see here. This equation is just a um discrete time version of that. One last thing before going to the empirical results is that um there's some sort of lateral competition or some sort of divisive normalization that appears from from the way we construct this problem. I want to mention that before going to the empirical results. Um okay so remember u is our membrane potentials right so we defined u is just log rate. If you exponentiate this equation which is are just you know iterative update rule you get to this equation which says the rate of a of a neuron at neuron I at time t + 1 is just its rate at the previous time point uh modified with this term that appears here. So, first of all, there's this feed forward drive term that says like, you know, if you're being stimulated through the stimulus, you can just increase the firing rate. But there's these other terms that um stabilize the dynamics because this says if this W is, by the way, just a recurrent connectivity matrix. It says if if two neurons have overlapping tuning, if they're if they care about the same feature, you know, if WIGJ is a positive value, then if neuron J fires a lot, it's going to actually silence this other neuron. So this competition um is is something that has been hypothesized to you know to contribute to many things like you know uh stability of cortical computation and and emergence sparity and so on. Um I just wanted to mention that it just pops out of our math. Uh also just because we made like those choices poson whatever log rate um something like that appears here. U and and we're going to see empirically that the algorithm is stable. It it actually you know never diverg it it converges beyond the training regime and so on. So this is kind of a theoretical reason for that. But yeah let's just move on because um we spent too much time on the theory side. Let me just show you some experimental results. So if you train uh if you construct if you use that um you know the iterative update rule and then turn that into an architecture that performs inference and then train it on natural image patches. This is the type of results you can get like this is the convergence results. So we trained these models uh using uh 16 training iterations and here we're comparing uh a posson model with a gausian model and a gausian plus rail model. So before actually looking at these results let let me just mention what is different between these models. So um to derive the the theory we just said look you can choose you can choose um posan for your for your posterior and um and that gives you all these like cool results. But then we don't stop there. We just say okay but you can also have gausian for your posterior. You can still have the same iterative update through natural gradient descent for gausian or you can even have gausian and follow that up with with the relu so that you get the positivity of of posson. Um so um these are like a different different models aim to tease apart different properties of posson that that might contribute to its you know uh performance. So like gausian uh doesn't have the positivity um of posson or or its discreetness. Gausian relu has its positivity but it it's not discrete. So it's like a continuous positive and continuous um unsigned. So that's why we compare these models. Um so what we have here in this in the results is that you want to make sure these models converge um to good approximate posteriors and when we measure that using these two uh measures we want to have a good reconstruction of the input that's the R squar uh and it's you know it's a number between 0 and one and and larger is better and portion zeros is the number of zeros in your representation. So the idea here is that if you want to represent the world um you have to represent it in in a very um highfidelity reconstruction and ideally using not many active neurons. That's how you save energy. That's the sparse coding idea. Therefore we want both the blue and green curve to be large values and ignore red for now. Um and yeah, if you compare these models, we see that posson has both high reconstruction and high sparsity. Um Gausian has the highest reconstruction, but it's not sparse at all by definition. And Gausian plus relu gets a little bit of sparity like little less than 60%. At around the same uh reconstruction performance of posan. Therefore, just the conclusion of this figure is that it seems like Pson reconstructs um the images at least as well as Gausian um um but it you know it doesn't lose much in the reconstruction but it this is very sparse. That's the point of this figure and and also all of the models converge beyond their training regime. And another thing interesting thing to notice is that after training these models on natural image patches, you can visualize the dictionary elements um the learned decoder and then you can see that the pan looks like these these gapors that you would see from you know if you look at the um the selectivity from primate visual cortex. Gausian looks pretty structureless and gausian learns these like uh pixel-like representations. So the conclusion is that um Bosan is not only more brain-like in this particular way and also it's more sparse. Um in the next figure which is a very dense one um we want to we want to see if if that result holds across hyperparameters. So we do a very large hyperparameter sweep. Um to understand this figure first of all let's just focus on what's on there. Right? First of all, on the x-axis we have sparity which we measure as portion of zeros in your representations and on the y-axis we have reconstruction, right? Um so we want to be ideally here, right? That that's the impossible to achieve ideal point. You have maximum reconstruction using no activation at all. So that's that's hard to achieve. But the closer you are here to this point, the better you are. And we have on here we have all the models um that we compared to um we have amotized models. First of all we have models that have a neural network encoder and we're going to compare these amotized models to their iterative counterparts. And for the iterative models one thing that I skipped I didn't mention is that if as you increase the training um the number of iterations during training you expect to see different behavior. But that's you know a detail that um you can check out the paper for if you're curious. So let's focus for now just on the iterative versus amortized because the point of this figure is that iterative inference yields better performance when you measure performance as like you know high sparity high reconstruction like for example in the Pson case the blue ones you have these are the iterative models they're kind of having this burrito front and amotized models fail to match that performance the the blue t squares. Um and the idea is that these you know um amortized models have like you know deep neural network encoders with like 6 million parameters yet they still cannot match the performance of iterative models. That's that's a takeaway here and and same is true for um gausian relu for example uh these are the iterative ones these are the amotized ones and for gausian again the the reconstruction iterative is better than amotized but you know um they're not very sparse. So, so to summarize the this figure really like panel A we just said okay let's just take each of these performances you know each of these points is is a model with different hyperparameter um different beta um and we're going to compute the ukidian distance between that and the star and that's the summary over here and here lower is better we see that first of all the first observation we have is that in all of these cases iterative model is better than its amortized counterpart. So one thing one takeaway here is that if you have an amortized neural network encoder and your model is not performing well it's possible that it's because you know the of the amortization gap which is a technical term that means like you you don't you're fail you're failing to find the optimal posterior through that neural network and and iterative post does uh best you know uh compared to these models and also So LCA this locally competitive algorithm which is a sparse coding algorithm does also as good as iterative post on VAVE. So one conclusion we draw from here is that um yeah I I I kind of skipped this because you know uh it's too much details but that the equation we derive for iterative plus VAE uh looks very much like the equation for LCA. Therefore, we can conclude that iterative panvia is just like, you know, LCA, but it's a spiking stochastic version of it. That's one of the um takeaways. Uh but yeah, so these are the two main results that we report in the main paper and we just run out of space basically. But there's a bunch of you know um uh appendix results that are also equally interesting. So let me just really quickly go through them. Yeah. So if you want to read the appendex you can this is the extended back extended background just you know all all you need to understand this paper. Then there's extended theory where we extend the pson derivations to uh to Gausian and to nonlinear decoders and so on. Um, and there's all sorts of other uh information if you're curious. And then extended experiments um where we explore other other properties of the model. Um, yeah, I want to show you this one. Where is it? Yeah. So we have these out of distribution generalization results that I think are equally interesting but we just didn't have space so we put them in the appendex. Um what is out of distribution generalization? Um if you train your your models on some data set and then you test it some in some other data set if those two data sets are you know sufficiently different then usually what you get from machine learning models is that they fail to generalize. That's a typical uh failure mode of machine learning models. But if you have iterative inference, we're going to find that um that's really not the case in in in our iterative poson. So that's that's the point of these results. What we do is we train models on Nest here and then test it on out of distribution um you know data sets like you know extended MNST which is just uh character data set uh omniots and even imageet 32 so grayscaleed cropped versions of natural images and also we tested on rotated emnest and we also compared to alternative uh models you know as as we briefly we discussed. Uh there's there are hybrid iterative amortized models such as uh iterative amortized VAE. This is the Marino paper 2018. There's another one semi-amortized VAE uh also from 2018 um where they start where they initialize the posterior with an amortized uh network and then they perform stocastic variational inference a few iterative updates on that initial amortized guess and we're going to compare to those two. Um our model is fully iterative. There's no neural network at all. Uh but these two models are hybrid and and we want to find out if um hybrid models perform as well on these kind of OD tasks and and the the spoiler alert. No, the answer is no. Um iterative wins basically. So this is um I think too much detail. I'm going to skip that. Let me just show you this result. So what we have here, let's just focus on this panel. We trained the all of these models including iterative poson v amortized PVA right this is iterative poson uh this is amortized PVA this is amortized iterative there's a hierarchical and and single layer version and this is semiotized we're going to compare all of these models in this task of you have these emnest digits all of these models were trained on this standard MNEST data set which is the first row and then we're going to rotate the digits by 90°. And we're going to look at two things, you know, um compared to the rotated digits, the original ground truth. Um amortized poson fails really bad. It it just it doesn't, you know, reconstruct any of these digits. And among the uh the hybrid models that we compare to, semivertised does the best um out of those three. And if you quantify this on the right hand side over here um we find that you know iterative bos does best. Um the first figure uh this one is reconstruction where we report mean square error and the x-axis is just the amount of rotation we apply and this other figure is just a classification accuracy. So that this is important because you know um if it was just reconstruction you know who knows like if if the model really understands the data. I mean okay sure in this for examp this this is a 90° task. Um sure we see that in the reconstruction we see um bosan does best. It's the lowest reconstruction error but you know it could be just the shallow features of of the data set. you know it it doesn't mean that this model has has learned to actually understand the semantic meaning of this data and that we confirm by by looking at the classification. But this is downstream classification uh when when we just show these images to the model and uh extract the final posterior and we train um logistic regression to just classify those rotated digits. It it turns out that the performance of the iterative plus on the blue bars it doesn't drop. It's it it remains flat. But as the task gets harder and harder, all the other models go down and up. So this indicates that it actually learns to interpret the distorted data in not only uh well enough to reconstruct it, but also well enough to be able to classify those rotated digits. Um and and I think there's there's other experiments that I'm going to skip. There's too much. Um I think this is the I think it's pretty crazy result. Um here we just say okay let's just take mnest digits rotate you know um crop them and and make them grayscaled because you know um sorry um yeah these are for im imageet 32x32 but we're cropped so that they they're um this center image is is where there's variance in uh mnest digits. So and if you if you show these inputs to the model and then let them perform inference across time as you see the the iterative pos starts to actually reconstruct these images that you can recognize this is a panda this is a dog and so on even though this model the iterative poson I want to I want to emphasize this this was trained on emnest it hasn't seen any natural images yet it can reconstruct them and all the other models including the semi-averized you know um they don't do as well and I mean this model it amortized iterative just does you know the worst none of these reconstructions look anything like the actual image the semiiamortized does decently well but not as good as iterative pos um and of course we also quantify that here so we have the number of iterations at test time and reconstruction error on on these cropped natural images. And there's really two things to notice in this figure. The first thing to notice is the final performance. It's just much better than all of these other models. That's one thing. But equally interesting to me is that the model actually keeps improving as time goes on. you know it's the the other models they don't improve as much or you know they even diverge at the end but iterative pos keeps improving and that that shows that it it's you know basically you can interpret this as like it's thinking more and more to to to be able to understand this difficult data set out of distribution data set um and and why is that we provide one possible explanation for why this out of domain generalization happens through this visual visualization. So if you visualize the learned decoder weight for the last layer of this iterative poson va it learns gabors from mnest I'm sorry yeah from mnest um these are you know primitive kind of like universal features that you can construct any image from these and iterative poson v learns those gibbors the poson v is the same latent distribution same integer whatever sparse representation but with a NLP encoder it just learns these like digits like ghost digits that it doesn't really learn any any gavors um so the conclusion is that if you have a model that learns these universal features and it has an inference algorithm that can utilize those universal features it's going to be able to reconstruct any data set even as crazy as you know grayscale corrupt natural images. So that's the conclusion for these uh OD results in page 58 of of the appendix. But you know um we the reason we put this in the appendix is that um I think this is a very cool result and it it just warrants more deeper exploration and even like in you know in tasks beyond uh reconstruction. I suspect that with this iterative inference algorithm, the model learns um compositional features that allows this generalization and and we want to test that on more difficult tasks, more more involved task than reconstruction so that we can explore it u give it the attention that it deserves. But yeah, that's that's pretty much it. And you know, there's a extended discussion too, which I think there's really no time to go through. But I hope that um this was actually interesting enough for you to actually go read the paper because uh there's a lot more in the paper that I just simply couldn't talk about. It's just um too much. Um but yeah, with that, I'm happy to take questions. Great. That last reconstruction was awesome. Thank you. Very cool. Uh in the image of the child, it almost looked like like the fingers of the like the the the base image was it almost looks like the child has extended their fingers. Yeah, this one is a little creepier. Yeah. Um Yeah. Very cool. Yeah. Kevin just wrote nice result and figures emergence of the primitives rather than overfitting. Yeah. Like and seeing the seeing the ghost digits in the emnest. It's kind of like yeah we we know we can pull out the template of a digit from overlaying a bunch of copies of the digit and just looking for sort of like the k means clustering of what does the archetypal representative look like? But to be able to do it the way that the visual system algorithmically does, extracting with the lateral uh relationships amongst layers to pull out the edges is is the kind of neuromorphic transfer. Yeah. Um okay, I'll ask some of the questions in the live chat. Anyone else can can write. Um Okay. Hi. asks, "Does this architecture solve catastrophic forgetting?" Okay, we we haven't tested that. So, I think my understanding of catastrophic catastrophic forgetting is that you train the model on some task and then you retrain it. You change the model parameters on a new task and it it fails to work on the first task you trained on. We haven't really explored that. Um and and by the way this this this model is is fairly uh underparameterized. Um it just has a decoder and therefore I expect that if you train it on one task and then you know train it on another task it might actually have some sort of uh catastrophic forgetting. Uh but um yeah I haven't I haven't really experimented with that. So I just don't know. Okay little curveball question. Are you on the Active Inference Institute Discord? I am not. I should join. Okay, I'll I'll put in the chat or afterwards a join link. That would be cool though. Definitely. Yes. Okay. Um there was one question about this relates to the lateral relationships amongst neurons. You mentioned that the membrane potential is a private variable. So how do we think about um and not that the goal of the model was to give a mechanistic account of neural tissue but how would you account for non-neural cell types like gal cells or like local field potentials? Mhm. Mhm. Okay. Yeah. I think I should uh highlight here that you know um one of the words we used in the title of this paper brain like you know it's it's a very interesting word because I think it's true to some extent. This model is brain-like in the following ways. Okay. So, it uses discrete and sparse representations that's relatively more brain-like than Gausian. It uses iterative inference that gets better and better over time. It also you can uh you know hypothetically we can think that's more brain like even though that's not it's not settled. We don't really know. Maybe brain is actually more amortized iterative hybrid in a in a sense but it's really not brain like in terms of these biological details. So like even this recurrent explaining away like okay for example another important way in which this model is not brain like is that there are no explicitly inhibitory neurons. If you look at these biologically plausible circuit models uh that people in computational neuroscience have been working with, they have explicit uh population of neurons that are excitatory and inhibitory and they have you know different um they exhibit different behaviors and and so on that is missing from this model let alone ga right so I think that it's yeah it's relatively more brain-like than let's say a gausian model, but it's still far from being brain like in a true and full sense of the term. So, in the posttock phase, you're in like looking back on some of these pretty theoretically synthetic but also implementably useful techniques that you've been working on with colleagues. like what are you looking to next or what kinds of work are you going to turn to now? Okay, that's uh um I I think that I really want to emphasize the engineering aspect these days. I want to make model that work on real data sets. So this paper is pretty theor theoryheavy. I guess just let's let's derive things from first principles and it works on toy data sets. It works on natural image patches. It works on enlist. It generalizes. All of these are very um um I would say preliminary but but but you know um highly encouraging results that shows that this model might actually work on real data sets. So right now I'm exploring many different directions like one of them is um in this particular paper we talk about you know an online update scheme where your posterior at time t literally becomes your prior at t+1. There's no predictive dynamics. There's no anticipatory dynamics where you evolve the posterior to become the next prior. I think that's a key missing piece that uh and without that it's not going to work on videos. you know we've only trained this on natural images like static images repeated many times that's one thing I'm working on um predictive component and and this model had a single layer it's not hierarchical but we know that you know from predictive coding and I have another paper from two years ago that hierarchical inference is has many benefits and and if I want to make this work on real data sets like a video it should have hierarchical latent structure so these are two directions. Uh I think they're related, but independent directions like predictive component and hierarchical architecture is what I'm pushing this toward. One last thing that I'm actually pretty excited about these days is that, you know, this out of domain generalization is is a big big challenge in robotics. you know, people train their robots in some, you know, in some environment and when you test those robots in some slightly different environment, even even just like simple luminance change and things like that breaks the the perception algorithm of those those robots. And because I have these like very promising OD results, I'm hoping that I can beef up this model and then show that it actually uh helps address some of those very difficult challenges in robotics, especially when it comes to OD. So just to summarize, predictive component hierarchical robotics. Awesome. Just while we're right here, could you say a little bit about the natural aspect and what does Fisher preconditioning do? Like what values are being transformed or conditioned? How and then how would you say that relates to whether something is like natural? I think I'm just borrowing that term from you know the literature natural gradient descent. you if you just look at the uh Amari's papers or like you know recent reviews of that that's just how you define natural gradient descent and what is so natural about it is just it it respects the intrinsic geometry of the you know parameter space I can go back to this figure here so you know we have okay um now we have you know u if you remember we have these we have these membrane potentials that's our state space and this curve red curve here is just how you evolve a posterior distribution. Like each point literally is just a posterior distribution through this operation. you exponentiate you construct a poson distribution from each point and it's not an ukidian space in the sense that if you want to go from here to here and this is like one unit of distance it might be different if you go in this other direction and I think it's actually if you want to if you want to understand why it's important um why do we have to have this like preconditioning for specifically for for inference. I'm going to actually find the references uh to point you to because they do a lot better job than I can do in this um uh to to motivate that. So, I'm going to actually just do it right now cuz I think this is actually this is this is not appreciated enough in the in the literature. So, um it's important thing. First of all, if you want to appreciate why natural gradient, definitely check this out. The Beijian learning rule is is a great paper and this Amari paper is of course you know um it's the canonical like the original original paper that talks about that and there's this there's another paper from MTS Khan from 2018 I I think I do cite it but I I might not be able to find it right now um that is like four or five page paper where they they show some figures and they they discuss the intuition why natural gradient is so central and important especially if you're doing um if you're doing inference. There we go. Start with this. Check out this paper. Uh it's five-page paper and and they they provide an intuition why um computing distances in the distribution space and computing uh or doing like uh stochastic gradient descent in the distribution space is not ideal. You have to do uh natural gradient descent to respect the intrinsic geometry and intrinsic geometry should be respected. Exactly. Anything else you want to add? This was awesome though and I think gives a lot of technical details and and really useful aspects. Well yeah thanks for having me. I mean I um I always enjoy these discussions and um I guess if you have any questions you can find me you know you can email me here you can check out the code and uh yeah that's it. Cool. Uh I put the Discord link in the chat if you want to join or you can uh find other ways and uh see you in one year. Definitely. Yes. Looking forward to it. Okay. Thank you. Bye. Okay. Thanks again. Bye.