Module 05: Action — The Busy Beaver

Learning Objectives

Understand what Action is (doing things).
Learn how Action changes the world.
See how Action makes your predictions come true.

Introduction: The Busy Beaver

Benny the Beaver looked at the rushing river. It was loud and fast!
"I predict this river will be a quiet pond," thought Benny.

But just thinking about it didn't change the river. Benny had to take Action.

Chomp, chomp, chomp. Benny gnawed on a tree.
Splash! The tree fell into the water.
Drag, push, pat. Benny built a dam with mud and sticks.

Slowly, the rushing river stopped rushing. It became a quiet, still pond.
Benny smiled. His Action made the world match his prediction!

Key Concepts

What is Action?

Action is doing something to change the world (or yourself).

 Thinking is inside your head.
 Action is using your body to move things.

Changing the World

When you take action, you change things!

 If your room is messy, you clean it. (Action changes the room.)
 If you are cold, you put on a coat. (Action changes you.)
 If you are hungry, you eat an apple. (Action changes your tummy.)

Making Predictions Come True

Remember the Thinking Cap? Sometimes we guess what will happen. But sometimes we guess what we want to happen, and then we act to make it true!

 Prediction: "I will build a LEGO castle."
 Action: Clicking the bricks together until the castle is real.

Activities

Activity 1: Simon Says

Simon Says... Touch your nose! (Action!)
Simon Says... Jump! (Action!)
Simon Says... Freeze! (Stop Action!)

Activity 2: The Magic Change

Here is a flat piece of paper. Can you use Action to turn it into a ball?
(Crumple it up!)
You changed the world!

Summary

Action is how we move and do things. Thinking helps us plan, but Action is how we actually change the world to match what we want. Benny the Beaver used action to turn a river into a home.

References

 The Little Engine That Could by Watty Piper (A story about trying and doing!)
 Harold and the Purple Crayon* by Crockett Johnson (Harold uses action to draw his world.)